0.PROLOGUE
=İlim ilim bilmektir, ilim kendin bilmektir=
<When does a human, especially someone like me, start writing? Or more precisely, when does the lived, the sensed, and the thought reach an intensity that becomes unavoidable to express? I don’t know, can one say for oneself that one is in such situation? I don’t know. A great pain, perhaps love, or a different tremor suspending an important decision; albeit vaguely, can put oneself in the restlessness of an impending change. It is a fearful anticipation: when one feels this unknown jolt approaching, one does not know what to do for a while. And then with full strength, one embarks on a venture that one has not even dreamed of before - or more precisely, one finds oneself in an action that one had not even dared to think before... (Atay 1998, 17)>
0x0.An Introduction
The present study concerns itself with earthquakes; which, rather than being its objects, become the inspiration for its initiation. It is considered as the factor that makes a beginning in the limit between the no-longer and the not-yet. To be shaken by the seismic waves that tremble the human is to be affected by immanence. This quivering effect resonates in the title, echoing itself in the motion set by those who ‘can sense motion in every stillness’ and ‘can see impermanence in every human achievement’ (Seremetakis 2019, 55). The immanence in earthquakes, which makes the beginning, is not to be conflated with a beginning nor an end, which makes it elude thought; those who claimed to have grasped the earthquake, have only grasped the debris with hubris. Such an undertaking is not the concern here, as the clearing of the debris and a pre-emptive defence against hubris are the tasks that seem to arise in conjunction. One can only be grasped by the earthquake, by the shudder of the unsettling tremor coming from no-where. It does not merely shake the foundations of things and concepts we took for certain, grounded in reality; it makes an opening as a fracture in the ground that acts as the foundation, unsettling
 ‘us’ in uncertainty, entangled with things or concepts. What a ‘mistake’ to have called it ‘fault’, perhaps a trace of its ‘fractality’?
The demonstration of fractal geometry of fault surfaces through a fractal model of topography, has been used to discuss earthquake dynamics elsewhere (Brown and Scholtz 1985; Bhattacharya et al. 2009). The implications of self-similarity or the scale invariance of fractals have also led to the deployment of the concept in the context of Melanesian ethnography, bringing fractals further into the frameworks of social and cultural anthropology. (Damon 1990; Mosko and Damon 2005; Jensen 2006; Strathern 1991; Wagner 1991; 2001). Others have engaged in eschatological discussions of the end of the world as a fractal event (Danowski and Viveros de Castro 2016). This seems to be linked with a broader theme of discussions that has been taking place across human geography and social theory concerning what has been called ‘the politics of scale’, that stress the social construction of scales while problematizing the link between ontology and politics (Smith 1992; Delaney and Leitner 1997; Marston 2000; Swyngedouw and Heynen 2003; Swyngedouw 2004; Blakey 2020). The present study concerning itself with earthquakes, in their relation to fault line fractals and politics of scale, generates the concept of seismopolitics to seize upon the discussions around fractals and scales, delving into the contemporary debates on fractality, the social construction of scales, and their politically contested ‘nature’.
Another concept to think alongside with is cultural tectonics, which necessarily resonates with the theory of plate tectonics, that pertains to the motion of the Earth, describing the inner dynamics and surface movements through various convergences, divergences and transformations. Although the term has been deployed before (Hayward 2000; Hanson 2013), the underlying motive for the deployment of the term has been to describe the impacts of cultural technological processes as analogous to the movement of tectonic plates, sending ‘cultural shockwaves’ on cultural values (Hanson 2013, 4). It has also been considered as offering a critique of globalization, denoting the interrelation between geomorphology and geo-imaginaries upon the cultural surface of the Earth, which is “a turbulent, molten mass with a thin crust” more than it is a unitary sphere that is firm and fixed, and which makes people “vulnerable to the juddering of plates and the magma currents below” (Hayward 2000, 40). In the context of present study, cultural tectonics is not fundamentally about cultural technological process in their links to the processes of globalization. Here, the concept is subjected to a transformation, in terms of a generalization beyond its particular technological grounding; in turn becomes effected by the earthquake which is an acknowledgement of the loss of an illusory foundation. It comes to circumspect, among others, the construction of culture as well as the culture of construction understood in a broader sense.