1x2. From Self-Resonance to Fractal Identity

What we have diagnosed as ‘self-resonance’ has also been observed in an article by Adam Louis-Klein, where he discusses the anthropological extension of non-philosophy. He observes that there is a transcendental arithmetic of self-relation or double transcendence, which can be called a 3/2 or a 2/3 structure of philosophy and which also extends into the relation of anthropological comparison, depending on whether the synthesis by thought is termed explicitly or performed implicitly (Louis-Klein 2020). Through a symptomatic reading of Vivieros de Castro’s and Descola’s, respectively explicit and implicit, synthesis by anthropological thought; Louis-Klein reveals how the position of the anthropologist gets doubled: As the anthropologist not only produces the relations but also “attempts to determine the common horizon of its two objects”, which are the anthropologist and the native (Louis-Klein 2020, 81). Instead of overdetermining the eﬀects of anthropological comparison, he attempts to develop a certain kind of symmetrization which renders the western and the non-western discourses as “inverse variants of each other, thus in a non-hierarchical relation of equality“ (Louis-Klein 2020, 82). 

Through crafting a sort of non-structuralism, the novelty of ‘ontologies’ in the so-called ontological turn, as in the perspectivism of Vivieros de Castro or the naturalistic taxonomy of Descola, are reduced to “local transcendentals which posses relative autonomy as clones of the One“; a relative autonomy that is derived from the “the Other as limit” or the Stranger which is “the Other seen-in-immanence, the Other which we immanently ‘are’” (Louis-Klein 2020, 89). The relatively autonomous local transcendentals resonates with our discussion of a non-dwelling perspective [0x2] which can be called “stranger-perspectives as clones of human immanence“ (Louis-Klein 2020, 89) or what we have been calling as immanent “echoes“ [0x3]. Louis-Klein considers this as the ‘uniﬁed theory of anthropology and philosophy’, whose descriptions are ‘anthro-ﬁctions’ of generic humanity, that are singularities subtracted from the relation of universal-particular and that conceives a “fractal identity” between these local transcendentals rather than a “containment hierarchy” (Louis-Klein 2020, 89). There is no dialectic between the global and the local, or the macro and the micro as they are considered to be identical in the last instance to the One, which is the Real determined by materiality. 

It should be noted that the fractal identity of local transcendentals as echoes of human immanence do not amount to a “holographic totalization of the conceptual world” which is put forward as the “replication of fractality in the ethnographer’s understanding” (Wagner 1991, 171). Ethnography is not a mere self-scaling device of the anthropologist, and the anthro-ﬁctions are not holographic metaphors in which the natives interpret the relationship that ends in the anthropologist’s reinterpreting this interpretation. This is why we have found it important to stress the inverted ethnographic function of fractality, as there is no glimpse of totalization in our account. We axiomatically posed the radical foreclosure of noise to both the anthropologist and the native, meaning neither the anthropologist nor the native has any indirect epistemic access to noise in terms of its representation, albeit still being under-determined by noise. We do not proceed from the rules of grammar and then lay down our axioms; we proceed with an axiom ﬁrst and then follow the syntax of the real as a descriptive account conditioned by its foreclosure. The eﬀects of such a conception is a symmetrization, or a ﬂattening, which can conceive the ‘ﬁeld’ as simultaneously a scalar ﬁeld and a vectorial ﬁeld such that non-commutative becomings as discrete lived experiences, echoes, can give rise to vectors in superposition.

The anthropologist does not hold the elevated position in devising this ﬁeld with its assumption of diﬀerence, to be confronted by ethnographic alterity which leads the anthropologist to invent the relation between oneself and its other. We hold that the ethnographic alterity is not something to be encountered in the ﬁeld extended outwards, but it is the stranger that lives within us, the stranger that we immanently are: Ethnographic alterity is not a ‘given’ that is transformed by synthesis or uniﬁcation, it is a given in the sense that there is no synthesis or uniﬁcation but rather that ‘we’ are given to it as uniﬁed or identical to it in the last instance. The absolutization or the totalization of the self-resonance of the anthropologist is a means for an accelerationist politics that suits the imperative of growth which proliferates knowledge and hierarchy amongst multitudes of people and chains them to the reign of capital; whereas what we oﬀer is a de-absolutized degrowth of philosophical and anthropological knowledge by ridding the suﬃciency implicit or explicit out of these kinds of knowledge. 

The scalar ﬁeld we mentioned above is what grants the identity in the last instance of local transcendentals to the One, that is, their fractal identity; as well as granting the vectorial ﬁeld we conceive a single wave function rather than two or multiple functions. The superposition of terms in our immanent matrix is not a re-localization of these terms in a commutative fashion, but it rather poses a single vector for two linear motions. Superposition and non-commutativity are terms Laruelle derives from quantum physics, but this formalism is not used in a folded manner to synthesize philosophy and physics as a simple fusion, or a dialectical relationship between the two; rather, the challenge quantum mechanics poses upon the classical logic is embraced by Laruelle as ‘collisions’ rather than a relation of the unity of opposites, which is ‘the dialectic’:

“Superposition is the form or principle of knowledge, its formalist factum or its existence as reality of science; it comes within the order of knowledge before the quantum, which is its material cause. As for non-commutativity, it is an essential trait that is derived from the quantum, its equivalent, since on the one hand the quantum is the index of the minimal existence of a material for science… and, on the other hand, it is split in its theoretical usage between two variables with inverse products.“ (Laruelle 2017, 166)

This consideration of superposition is a substitution for the idea of totality, whereas non-commutativity is inspired by Heisenberg’s quantum postulate with its formula as [p, q]=pq - qp = ih (where p and q are observables, p the position and q the momentum of a particle, i being the imaginary number and h is the Planck constant) which is the origin of the non-commutative geometry. The Planck constant is considered as the generic constant of the lived experience, which is the “minimum limit that cannot be exceeded, it signals the discreetness of human life and so of all life“ (Laruelle 2021, 101). The quantum formalization in Laruelle is a philosophical analog of the uncertainty principle in physics, which does away with the deterministic conceptions of metaphysics; it can perhaps be seen as in a dialogue with Levi-Strauss’ canonical formula.