1x3. From Measurement to Decoherence


Perhaps the most famous and much easier illustration of the paradoxical nature of quantum superposition is the thought experiment of Schrödinger which involves a cat and a mechanism, that is made up of a radioactive substance whose probable decay triggers the release of a poisonous gas that could kill the cat, placed in a box without a window and then sealed. The paradox reveals the measurement problem which lies at the heart of the interpretations of quantum mechanics that poses the problem of cat’s being alive and/or dead until the box is opened and an observation is made. At the end of Tristes Tropiques (1955), Levi-Strauss ends with the remark “in the wink of an eye, heavy with patience, serenity, and mutual forgiveness, that sometimes, through an involuntary understanding, one can exchange with a cat”, which can seemingly enable us to grasp the essence of human species beyond thought and beneath society (Levi-Strauss 1955, 398). Levi-Strauss’ ending remarks also sound like an homage to the famous cat of Schrödinger’s. 


This problem of ‘observation’ could also be argued to bring us to the heart of the problem in ethnographic observation: Could the ‘natives’ be behaving the way do because they are being observed? If any observation changes the state of a given system, we could argue that there is no ‘neutral’ observation as in we cannot know what the natives’ intentions are if we know their location or we cannot know where they stand on a given issue if we know what their intentions are. The collapse of the wave function or the wave packet reduction does not really make sense because we cannot say “at which moment the actualization of some products of knowledge out of all possible vectors or virtual observables, that is, generic quantum potentials or potentialities, takes place” (Läwen 2020, 131). A measurement just replaces a virtual observable by an actual observable which grants the irreducibility of generic quantum states to classical states of physical phenomena. The collapse or the reduction of the wave packet only makes ‘sense’ if we try to approximate the superposition from a perspective in ‘coherence’, after perhaps a measurement has been made.

This ‘coherence’ is the anthropologist’s echoing time to oneself as in ‘conducting’ a ﬁeldwork experiment and then proceeding to refer to time in the reduction of observation as well as the attribution of the measurement to oneself. Anthropologist is the ﬁgure that opens the sealed box, to check whether the cat is dead or alive, so as to gain an involuntary understanding through its exchange of winks with the cat; there is a sense of going to far away places and making them near while making what is near seem so far away in a sort of chiasmistic crossing, or the so-called ethnographic journey. The journey involves the crossing of borders and giving a ‘coherent’ account of the encounter with ethnographic alterity which is already assumed by the anthropologist. We could ask whether the anthropologist actually meets its cultural other, or rather this journey is devised as a sort of self-discovery, meeting the stranger-within out in the ﬁeld and giving a ‘coherent’ account of this discovery in an ironic manner.

This phase of our study, the theory of cultural tectonics and complementary seismopolitics, has seen the discussion of our concepts, introduced in the beginning, in their resonance with anthropological knowledge and ethnographic theory; while we did not primarily deal with earthquakes here, we rather ‘tested’ the conceptualizations oﬀered in the beginning against the backdrop of ethnography and anthropology. Considered together, these two phases make up sort of a guide or a map in terms of how to ‘read’, ‘listen’ or ‘navigate’ the upcoming phases. Our echology takes a less abstract shape as we proceed with weaving or suturing elements from the ﬁeld, which in whole is considered as a ﬁction. 

<…Right after I ﬁnished this quasi-vignette(-are you really, unironically calling this a quasi-vignette? -believe me, it sounds much better in Turkish (vinyetimsi)) it was already midnight, and I tried to get a few hours of sleep before I wake up to another day full of thesis writing. After perhaps a couple hours of uneasy sleeping, I woke up and proceeded with my morning routine which involves more coﬀee and more thesis writing in front of the screen and the control board that is keyboard: more clicks and more breaks. This ritualistic setting was interrupted by a phone call and on the other side of the line, my friend from Istanbul. This friend is the cat’s new companion for they share a ﬂat together, and our communication involves a lot of discussion about how the cat is doing, what she is doing, perhaps a couple of videos and photographs from time to time; him calling was not something that was extraordinary, so I picked up the phone without second guessing what it could be about. -Hey, how are you doing? -Not much, same old story; working on my thesis still… What’s up with you? -Brother, I’m not feeling very good -What happened, what’s wrong?

-The cat… she fell oﬀ the window… I don’t exactly know how it happened… You know my place has the mosquito nets on the windows, but one of them was out of place and you know very well that I am very sensitive about closing the windows before sleeping… But last night I fell asleep with the window open, and when I woke up I could not ﬁnd her around… I went down to the street and shouted for her… she heard me and meowed back… she was in a restaurant’s backyard which was locked… I jumped over the door and found her with her mouth covered in blood… She was responsive and came onto my lap but I was very scared probably as she also was… I called the ﬁre department and the police to get them to help me by unlocking the door I climbed over… But they were not taking it very seriously…So I had a heated discussion with them over the phone which involved a lot of cursing and shouting… Eventually, I got some cop to help me by bringing a portable ladder… I handed her to the cop and then we immediately went to a veterinary clinic… I bursted into tears, sobbing, gasping, groaning, lamenting… This whole thesis feels so utterly pointless, stupid, nonsense, bullsh-t… I don’t know how I can proceed or why I should keep writing… I lost all sense of direction… any crumble of motivation… all fell oﬀ through a window that I knew very well to have closed… my fear… did I cause this?… did I aﬀect the cat in any way?… is her falling oﬀ my fault?… I don’t know… What I know is that I don’t want to keep on writing… To hell with academia, to hell with anthropology, to hell with this thesis…> 