2x1. Biography of an Ordinary Anthropologist

<If the earth can be though as screaming, then the seismographs are there to record it. Yet, the disasters which we deem too natural, are in fact social in their consequences and their conditions of possibility. This insight is rooted in my childhood, as early as three years old: The 1999 Marmara Earthquake devastated my home, a year after my father had died. The only place to stay we had been left with, was my mother’s village where I had spent the initial years of my childhood. My mother’s family, along with the whole of the village, were muhajirs, migrant muslims who had come from Abkhazia in the Caucasus. This extraordinary chain of events have positioned me in a culturally heterogenous milieu. The people of the village communicated in a mixed language, predominantly Abkhazian with a couple of Turkish words thrown in. Through years of being present in that cultural conversation, I had developed an understanding of the language and the cultural setting, attending and observing the rituals. Yet, the question that was beginning to shape out of the ambivalent feeling regarding my position in this broad cultural context persisted over years. My ﬁlial relations would only allow me to assume the role of the “nephew” of the Abkhazians, yet I was very much growing to adapt to the cultural ethos.>

This is an excerpt that is taken from the motivation letter that was sent to KU Leuven to apply for the Social and Cultural Anthropology master’s program. In a sense, it is a biographical note that gives vent to the motivation for choosing to study such a program, detecting the seeds of anthropological inspiration sown into the childhood. It is an anticipatory note that has shaped the current study. Without even going through the professional education, there are glimpses of what was thought to make up anthropological knowledge. Looking back, it sounds very naive in its emulation of what could be deemed as an anthropologist’s autobiographical past. It feels very much like an exclamation that expresses a statement such as this: Ethnography is not a self-scaling device that belongs to professional anthropologists… Here I am, a non-anthropologist making ethnographic observations without even going through professional training. 

<I stand here in front of this building, yet again after 17 years. It is the ‘Earthquake Culture Museum’ that is located in the center of my hometown, Adapazarı, which had been wrecked by an earthquake in 1999. The main structure of the building is concrete, which is shaped to give the impression of a collapsed building with sharp edges that are irregularly skewed. There are inclined columns that support the main structure of the building, which are seemingly placed in a random manner, and which keep the building standing. Going down a few steps by the stairs and in through the entrance, which is a rather small door that is part of a larger glass structure made up of rectangular PVC windows; a security guard, who is the only other person in the building with me, asks me to sign the visitor book. A poem from a local poet that is on the wall in front, welcomes me and it reads:  ‘...the clouds arrived like shrouds, in piles  Wives and children, roses and leaves,  Suddenly laid down to death An arm over there, a leg, a shoe,  A pair of eyes: hopping around Here’s Turkey: a handful of bareness...’ 
A strange feeling of ﬂeeting time ﬁlls me up akin to how the ground moves and shakes the earth beneath my feet. It is the obscure mixture of dampness and years of neglect I inhale through my nostrils, which is not how I remember my ﬁrst time being here. A small pupil in primary school, excitedly walking between these corridors among my peers, a group of children that have just moved from tent cities to the school a couple of years ago. The photographs, so many photos that adorn these moist walls and portray the shared traumatic experience of the earthquake; I am once again struck by the sheer nakedness of this atrocity, the violent brutality of these images: Devastated buildings, wreckages, rescue operations, the pain and suﬀering of those who have relatives under the debris... A little farther away, a memorial with little glass ﬁgurines bearing the name of those who died in the disaster, stand over the miniature landscape with small houses in between them. I reminisce the memories of those that lost their lives- now here, now gone- unlived memories that are crystallized in these glasses and that spike the eyes of those that gaze over them... It feels like a simulated experience, indeed, there was a virtual earthquake simulator around here somewhere...Expectedly, the simulator appears as if it has been defunct for a while now... The stage has regular kitchen equipment, cabinets, table and chairs and they are still here, yet the stage that used to shake does not anymore. It now bears the printed sign that says ‘out of order’ on the green and red painted walls of the simulator. I recall lividly, the 7.4 magnitude tremor being simulated here, as well as the troubling list of things to do in such an event: turn oﬀ the gas valves to prevent ﬁre, form a triangle of life beneath the table; drop, cover and hold on for your dear life! Unfortunately, it does not seem possible anymore to learn from experience within this dirty and old space that is uncared for. A mop and a bucket which seems like that are not actively in use are standing next to the wall, which makes me question whether they are used for cleaning the museum or they are part of the scenery on the stage. The unnerving smell and the randomness of broken lights accompany me on my way out. I see an old seismograph, which bears no explanation and one can only guess what it is, another map which shows the earthquake risk in Turkey and a world map next to it. Old, black and white photographs from earlier earthquakes that happened in the city are the last remaining images before I get out. I walk out of the museum, and breathe the open air in the 
city whose history is riddled with earthquakes. Is this the museum that such history deserves?> 

This piece was written for the Interpreting Data Anthropologically course, which is a part of the master’s program. It was written after a revisit to the earthquake culture museum and it reads very much like a commentary on the ﬂeeting time where the author is not only wandering in the museum, but also around his dusty memories, recalling the times when he was a small children in elementary school. The school was opened right after the earthquake to become a home for those children who were aﬀected by the earthquake. This school has been a home to the author since the kindergarten up until the last year of high school, and all of his friends were in one way or another aﬀected by the earthquake. The earthquake simulation in the museum was an integral part of the memories of those children. They not only relived their traumatic memories, but they also in a way learned to cope with those memories; what to do in the event of an earthquake, the basic tips that could make a huge diﬀerence in terms of saving lives. 


<Lake Sapanca is a fresh water lake that is twenty kilometers away from the center of my hometown, which is the location of earthquake museum in the vignette above. This lake is actually located on a tectonic hole between Gulf of Izmit and the lowlands of Adapazarı, which was the main axis of rupture in the fault that produced the 1999 Earthquake. The tectonic activities are quite literally the causes of the existence of this lake in this place. The Earthquake and its corresponding tectonic activity not only brings this lake into place, it also symbolically brings the three friends in the conversation together. These friends are the part of the friends that I have mentioned in the vignette, that went to the same primary school with me which was a school that was opened to help the victims of the earthquake. After visiting my hometown previous summer, and being in the museum once again; I have come together with them in this lakeside, which is the place of one of our friends’ summer house. I use the initial G to refer to my parts in the conversation and use A and B for my friends’ parts. 

G:...the museum was not in a very good condition, which made me wonder if you guys remember how it was like, or have you been there recently? A: No, I haven’t been there recently B: I now realize I even forgot about that place’s existence before you brought it up G: Yeah, it’s not like how I remember... First of all, the place seemed so small B: Or maybe we have grown too much A: Was it the ﬁfth year or the fourth year we were there, I can’t recall... B: I think it was the fourth year, I barely remember the entrance and many photographs around G: I think the same photographs are still hanging on the walls A: Yeah, but the main thing was the earthquake simulator... I never forget that  B: You are right! I remember shaking on this platform... A: The triangle of life... B: Drop, cover, and hold on...  A: And you could actually change the magnitude of the earthquake in that simulator B: The quake of our group wasn’t so strong G: That’s maybe why you have forgotten about the place A: I think we have gotten something above 8.0 B: So it was more powerful than ’99 earthquake which was 7.4  A: Allegedly…  G: What do you mean? A: Well, there are rumours I have heard that the magnitude of the earthquake was above 8.0... and that it was deliberately stated as being 7.4 G: Why would they do that? A: If I remember it correctly, with earthquakes above 7.5 magnitude the government actually needs to declare the whole area as a disaster zone, which requires giving tax exemption to that zone for a couple of years... And we are talking about maybe the most industrialized corridor in our country... It would have collapsed the government and brought down the economy B: That’s a conspiracy if I ever heard one... G: Yeah, but the thing is, the government did collapse and there was an economic crisis right after the earthquake, the 2001 crisis...
A: Yeah but it could have been much sooner and more drastic... I don’t know, it is not something I have researched... only something I heard…> 

This informal interview or conversation was written as a part of the same course in the master’s program as above. What could be highlighted in this passage is the controversy surrounding the magnitude on the Richter scale which sounds a lot like a conspiracy theory. Aside from evaluating this as a truth claim and then dismissing the absurdity of the statement, there is merit in taking the statement seriously. Deborah Coen notes that Richter’s scale has a life of its own, apart from the intentions of its inventor who didn’t expect the scale to be universal, and there is a danger of neglecting ﬁeld observations in the making of the formula: the earthquakes to be deﬁned as magnitude coupled with the epicenter (Coen 2013, 263). Human experiences of earthquakes are reverted to become ‘subjective’ experiences in the face of rising ‘objective’ observations that are oscillations which seismographs record and which become visible on the computer screen. Yet, this grave injustice resonates in the rumors of people whose challenge to oﬃcial accounts of earthquakes are to be taken seriously. There is so much controversy around the oﬃcially announced magnitudes of earthquakes because people’s experiences cannot be represented with a number on the scale and a location on the map. 


<We were sitting together in the guest room of my aunt-in-law’s house and there is quite a crowd: my aunt-in-law, her two children who are my cousins, my two aunts, my mother, and another cousin and her daughter. So there were 9 people in the room together with me. I have just ‘returned’ from Leuven to Adapazarı. I did not expect this interaction to become a part of ﬁeldwork, yet as I was researching ‘earthquakes’, you can never anticipate when the topic will come up. My aunt-in-law asked me how was my education going and what was I researching. I told her that I was studying ‘earthquakes’ and she proceeded to tell me about her experience: sometimes at night when she is trying to sleep, she feels this vibration as if an earthquake is happening just as she is falling asleep and she suddenly wakes up. One of my cousins added how this thinking about a coming earthquake is a usual part of her sleep routine. Another cousin adds that he sometimes makes up scenarios in his head right before he sleeps and in these imaginary scenarios, he makes plans about what to do if an earthquake were to happen at that moment: where would he take cover, what would he do afterwards… I try to show my empathy with them adding that this is what I also often think before I sleep, and it is something that comes up a lot in my conversations with various people.  My aunt-in-law asked me whether I have any ‘remedy’ to her uneasiness and I answered by saying that I am not an expert in ‘psychology’ of earthquakes and my ‘research’ is related with social and cultural aspects of earthquakes. This little conversation triggered questions from one of my cousins who is a research associate in maritime studies in the local university. Our roles were reversed and she started asking me about what anthropology is and what is our research methodology. I was the one who was being interviewed about what anthropology is. In fact, this interaction was not unique to this particular moment because ‘anthropology’ is quite an ‘alien’ discipline to a lot of people in Turkey, as it is not very common to study anthropology in Turkey, with so few departments in Turkish universities. There were a lot of cases when I was the one put in the receiving end of the questions about what is it that anthropologists do. So I said I cannot speak as a spokesperson for the entire discipline and you could get as many diﬀerent answers to these questions as you ask diﬀerent people working within the boundaries of the discipline. By this moment, everyone in the room was listening to our conversation. I use G to refer to my parts and A to my cousin’s. G: Anthropology is simply put human-science. I study social and cultural anthropology which produces knowledge about humans in societies and their cultures. A: What kind of approach do you use? I know you can use qualitative or quantitative approaches in science G: Well, if I had to classify I would say I am more inclined to make use of a qualitative approach that involves participant observation, as in being in the ﬁeld with the people you are studying.  A: How do you gather your data then? My research uses a lot of quantitative data so I am asking out of curiosity.G: There are in-depth, semi-formal or informal interviews we make use of. We ask questions to people we are with, trying to get a sense of how they perceive themselves, what they do, and their values, beliefs… But it is certainly not limited to this. You can be involved in activities that people take part in. You record these interactions and you try to make sense of them.  A: It sounds very interesting, but also a bit like it is something more personal. G: Yeah you could say that, but I think what diﬀerentiates anthropology from a lot of other disciplines is its claim for being a holistic science A: What does that mean, holistic? G: I would say it means looking at the totality of relations that make up a human being: our research problematizes how knowledge is being produced, it attempts to reveal the power relations inherent in the production of knowledge. Self-reﬂexivity is a term that is discussed a lot in anthropology.  A: Can you elaborate a bit? G: So the thing is, it is by now well known that anthropology as a disciplinary framework in the West was initially a colonial endeavour. Powerful people in the West were fascinated by other cultures, they sent their missionaries to these distant lands they were extracting value from. They wanted to know whether they were human like themselves or how diﬀerent they were from them. As it grew out of this, it started questioning its own beliefs and assumptions about cultural diﬀerences. It started showing that this very production of knowledge about other cultures is not so neutral or innocent as they deemed it to be in the ﬁrst place. So, there is a constant questioning of what anthropologists are actually doing to these other people. A: But how can you actually incorporate these facts in your research? G: Well for example, we are now talking about science here and I could make use of this conversation in my research, give an account of our discussion and make sure that I am involving as much about the context we are in as I can. And you know what, this is a particularly good example here because I am not the one asking questions, I am being questioned which is very revealing to me. A: So you will write about our conversation here too? G: Well if you are feeling OK with being a part of my research A: I would be more than happy if I am helping in any way. G: You are doing more than helping, you are making me question the fundamental assumptions I have about what I am doing. A: It sounds very diﬀerent to what I am doing and how I think of science. G: I don’t know, if I had to talk speciﬁcally about my approach to anthropology, I don’t see it as being something very diﬀerent than what other people everywhere are doing. See, I am very critical of science being regarded as something only a select few, special people could be doing behind the closed doors and in their ivory towers. My interest in earthquakes is precisely this: When an earthquake happens, that tower collapses and everything is ﬂattened; the hierarchies do not hold. You could say what diﬀerentiates me as an anthropologist and perhaps you as a non-anthropologist is that I am a part of an institution that grants a certain legitimacy to my research. A: Can you really say it is as simple as that? G: Well, maybe not as simple as that because I have been reading, writing, discussing and really immersing myself in the discipline so that I can say what we are doing is not totally diﬀerent than what other people are doing. The message here is perhaps that when I will be writing about this conversation here, I will not claim that is something more valuable or more useful than if you were to take our discussions here and make something out of it.  A: You have opened a way of looking at science I haven’t really considered before… By this moment, some of the others in the room already lost their attention in our conversation while others were listening all ears when suddenly my elder aunt interrupted: Look at our children go! They are all grown up and discussing serious things! I am proud of you guys, all of you!> 

The context and the conversation which is put forward above was a frequent position during the time in ﬁeldwork. Anthropology is not a discipline that is widely known and popular in Turkey. So, a lot of people that we have come across in the ﬁeld does not really have any, let alone preconceived idea about what anthropology is, or at least in comparative terms when it is contrasted with disciplines such as sociology or urban studies with whom it shares a lot of research interests in the Turkish context. As Birkalan-Gedik also observes, ”Turkey does not share a history of the so-called Western classical anthropological distinction of home and ﬁeld as two separate sites located in separate geographies” (Birkalan-Gedik 2018, 6234). But this is not something that was a limitation because people were generally very curious as to understand what this diﬀerent sounding discipline really does. As we have proposed earlier, much of the confusion that arises from the obscure sounding Greek rooted word ‘antropoloji’ could be cast away and made much more clear if it was to be transformed into ‘insan-bilim’ (human-science).