2x3. Islamic Make-up and ‘Cat Bonds’

David S. Sayers (2001) discusses what he calls ‘Muslim Theodicy’ as it is reﬂected in the reaction of the Turkish Islamically-motivated media to the Marmara earthquake. Following the newspaper articles for 30 days after the earthquake, he notes the theological position of the Islamic media “by mapping out the Qur’anic matrix for their claims which is contextualized by stating the reactions” (Sayers 2001, 2). Sayers lays down three interpretations of the causes of the earthquake, as the instrument of god, referring to the explanations oﬀered by the newspapers as the following: the majestic interpretation, the merciful interpretation, and earthquake as a trial. These three theological interpretations are weighed upon the Qur’anic matrix by referring their context to the holy book of Qur’an, and then ‘tested’ by constructing the sociopolitical matrix which are presented as ‘outside’ factors that “determine how these claims have been weighted and presented” (Sayers 2001, 34). The timely observations of Sayers detects how Turkey’s secularization processes have been intricately linked with the position of Islam within the body politic and in the daily life, and shows how the discourse in Islamically-motivated media has seized upon the secular-religious fault line by re-emphasizing the role of Islam in dealing with a catastrophe such as the 1999 Earthquake.
Just as Sayer’s piece notes the role of media in shaping the discourse about earthquakes in Turkish public life, it can be combined with the transformation the state following the 1999 Earthquake. Perhaps the relevant projection of this transformation for our discussion can be noted down as the transformation of earthquake risk and insurance regimes, which is exempliﬁed by the introduction of the compulsory earthquake insurance in Turkey after the 1999 earthquake, as well as the creation of Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool (TCIP). The role of the state in transforming the land into a commodity, as well as the role of construction sector in building the hegemony of the state has been noted before (Çavuşoğlu 2021). What is explanatory for our case is the role of the 1999 earthquake in the subsequent 2001 ﬁnancial crisis in Turkey that has been alleviated by getting loans from from the IMF which sought to stabilize the dire eﬀects of the ﬁnancial crisis. This yields the possibility for a theorization of the earthquake as a ’shock doctrine’ by what has been called ‘disaster capitalism’ (Klein 2007). Klein’s theory has received critical engagement by Kai Heron, who revealed how the theory of ‘disaster capitalism’ assumes there is a ‘normal’ to return to; whereas he proposes to call the catastrophe cycle as ‘capitalist catastrophism’:
“Capitalist catastrophism is what happens when capitalist realism begins to fray at the edges. It describes a situation in which capitalism can no longer determine what it means to be “realistic,” not because of the force of movements assembled against it but because capital’s self-undermining and ecologically destructive dynamics have outstripped capitalism’s powers to control them” (Heron 2020). 
Capitalist catastrophism does not put forward a coherent social theory such as disaster capitalism; it reveals the unmaking of social formations in this ‘late’ phase of capitalism. 

Foti Benlisoy (2023) uses this concept of capitalist catastrophism and its catastrophe cycles, to argue how 1999 earthquake has been used as an excuse to reinstate the construction-oriented growth strategy as well as becoming the ‘ground’ of the transformation of the entire legal infrastructure of the urban transformation in the following twenty something years. We could note here how media and ﬁnancial system operate as complementary forces on the seismopolitical character of the Turkish state, in terms of its seizing upon the disasters to protect the class-based interests. Seismopolitical transformation of the Turkish state reveals the so-called neo-liberal transformation of Turkish economy with its “Islamist“ or “Neo-Ottoman“ make-up to the corporatist growth strategy that fetishizes construction by attaching self-standing value on ‘properties’ that is its symbolic hallucination. 

<…The following excerpt is a conversation with a friend of mine who works in the risk management department of one of the biggest banks in Turkey. We have been in communication during the writing of the thesis as I have asked him to explain how certain ﬁnancial instruments are used in the case of earthquake insurances and risk management. I use A to refer to his parts and G to refer to my parts in the discussion. G: …I have been reading upon what is being called catastrophe bonds or simply ‘cat bonds’ in the ﬁnancial sector, I wanted to you ask since you are more involved in the ﬁnancial sector than I am A: Yeah, I am not directly working with catastrophe bonds but I know some things about them G: Would you care to elaborate for me what they entail? A: A catastrophe bond is simply a bond or an insurance linked security, which is a sort of debt arrangement… It allows for the issuer to get a sum of money from the holder of these bonds for a ﬁxed term in return for a promise of interest payment. In the case of catastrophe bonds, they are used for hedging the risks disasters such as earthquakes to the ﬁnancial markets G:What does this hedging mean? A: It is simply a strategy to limit the risk of a ﬁnancial asset G: The asset being earthquakes in this sense? A: Yeah, it is a derivate of earthquake insurances… the ﬁnancial eﬀects of earthquakes are huge which can be observed in the 1999 Earthquake and its subsequent ﬁnancial crisis of 2001… Turkey has changed the legislation to make earthquake insurance compulsory and created the Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool which collects the earthquake insurance payments in a sort of pool and then hedges the risk of earthquakes to the ﬁnancial markets… For example, TCIP works with a reinsurance ﬁrm where they create a market for selling cat bonds which promises to pay something like two percent or three percent per year as the investors can choose to have their money stay within the pool for a ﬁxed period of time. TCIP takes all the money and puts it in a bank account which is backed by US dollars… G: This is the case if an earthquake does not happen, right? A: Yes, if an earthquake doesn’t happen, then the interest payments get done smoothly… But if an earthquake happens that triggers the parameters which is determined before, then TCIP takes all the money to pay for the earthquake insurance payers in Turkey for their claims G: How do these parameters get determined? A: Well I cannot pinpoint the formula right now but it involves a precise mathematical modelling that takes a lot of factors into account such as the magnitude, intensity and so on… G: It sounds like the wealthiest people are gambling with the prospects of human life on a mass scale A: Well, it really depends on how you want to look at it.. In another sense, this is how the economy works and the state is trying to minimize the ﬁnancial risk of disasters such as earthquakes G: Couldn’t the state just make the houses safer and earthquake resistant instead of gambling with the lives of the countless humans? A: It would not make much ﬁnancial sense if the state cannot ﬁnd the necessary resources for taking such a massive reconstruction project…> 