3x2. Pangaea of our Common Dreams/Nightmares 

<…In the beginning of February this year, we woke up to a terrible morning with the news of very strong earthquake devastating the southern parts of Turkey and the northern parts of Syria. After some phone calls and messages to the friends that are from those regions, I felt ruined staying in my room without being able to do anything other than read the news online. So I went outside and walked to ‘Pangaea’ in the social sciences campus in Leuven. The earthquake was all that we could talk about with the few friends gathered there, sharing with each other the ‘news’ we were able to gather from various sources. And then we were hit by the news of a second powerful earthquake hitting the same region which had blackened the already dark mood that was among us. Everything lost its meaning, as our presence far away from those that try to ﬁnd their families under debris, had caused the loss of our direction in life. The dark screen of our phones or computers were acting like pointed needles, bleeding our eyes with each passing ‘news’ from the region. 

It was the very same days when I was struggling to devise this present study, with questions such as ‘Have I gathered enough data?’ or ‘Have I done enough?, when all of a sudden everything I touch, every piece of information, every little interaction with the people that were far away and close by, had the prospect of becoming ‘data’ in my work. Day after day, I was struggling with being weak and powerless to help anyone aﬀected by the earthquake, as well as trying to cope with being overwhelmed with the sense of direction I had in my life, in terms of what I was doing in Leuven, what I was doing researching ‘earthquakes’, what I was doing studying anthropology and so on; my thoughts and mood were in free-fall towards a bottomless pit that felt paradoxically like being under the rubble of a wrecked house. It was not just this free-fall within ruins that felt overwhelming, it was also the feeling of being outright wrong or unjustiﬁed in feeling the things I was experiencing as if my situation could be compared with the people that were looking for their loved ones, dead or alive, within the ruins or in mass graves that were opened. I was not only feeling wrong for going through such a disaster as a collectivity, I was by the same move feeling wrong ‘including’ myself in that collectivity as if my suﬀering was anything substantial.  I had tried to send any money I spared for my ‘leisure’ to any call for help I received from friends or organizations working in the ﬁeld to help the victims. The more I was sending the more it felt wrong as if ‘money’ was the only instrument I could channel my grief and desire to help people. It was then when we were approached by the oﬃce members of Pangaea who asked us whether they could help us in any way, and they have been very helpful in suggesting that we could organize a gathering here in Pangaea for solidarity purposes. Initially, I did not feel like I had any energy or motivation for such an event; but with every person I have shared the prospect of having a solidarity event, I was sensing the sparks of what would turn out to be a pretty big event, at least in my own standards. Slowly and confusingly, we have formed an online group for discussing the possibility of such an event and what we could be doing.  The plan was decided as to bring ‘food’, more speciﬁcally ‘local’ food from Turkish and Syrian cuisine that was sold to raise money to send to the organizations working on the ﬁeld in the earthquake aﬀected regions. As the organizing committee, we decided to make the ‘bake sale’ a non-commercial activity by not including any commercial venture to use the platform for their advertisement purposes. There were a lot of people, students and non-students, as well as other businesses, restaurants and others, from all over Leuven and Belgium that supported our cause by bringing what they can for sale. In a few hours, almost all the food was ﬁnished. There was quite a queue in and out of Pangaea, where the solidarity event has taken place. Some people said they couldn’t wait in the queue but still wanted to help, so they have put money in the donation box we have prepared. There were a lot of cases where people gave more money than the value of food they ‘bought’.  A few days later, KU Leuven sent the ‘Turkish and Syrian community’ an e-mail to invite to an informal meeting. This event was planned to bring together people from these communities to connect and share the questions, concerns and reﬂections with the university’s administrative staﬀ. I did not know what to expect from this meeting before going there and when I arrived, I was surprised to see the whole top level administrative staﬀ of the university there. Taking place in the Jubileumzaal, I was mesmerised by this splendent hall which I hadn’t been in before. Arranged as a reception, there were snacks (should I call it Canapé?) on the tables, as well as wine and other drinks which was also striking to me as I had no idea what to expect from this meeting. Another thing that made me think a lot about was the reverberation eﬀect this hall added to the human voice: Anyone speaking had the backing of reﬂections that strike from all over the place.  The issue I want to bring into our discussion here was perhaps the only contentious moments in this whole encounter: the issue of aid and which organization to trust with your money to help those on the ground. This topic was also one of the critical discussions in our solidarity event in Pangaea. As we had known beforehand, KU Leuven had donated to Belgian Red Cross and as far as the international agreements are concerned, Belgian Red Cross was working in cooperation with Turkish and Syrian Red Crescent. But if anything our experiences with ‘war’ in these countries show us, it is that every single issue, including humanitarian aid in the event of such a catastrophe, is politicized through and through. There were ‘scandals’ of Turkish Red Crescent, such as selling tents to the organizations working on the ground, or the Syrian Red Crescent being evidently non-existent in the northern parts of Syria. These points about the politicized nature of humanitarian aid were raised as something to be discussed by two of the attendees, from Turkey and Syria respectively, which had aroused discussions within the hall. Another attendee has added that he has worked with the Syrian Red Crescent before and that they were a legitimate organization trying to help the victims. There was also an attendee that had come to make a critical observation to the attendee that raised the topic of politicization of humanitarian aid. That critical observation had to do with ‘discrediting’ the Turkish Red Crescent in the face of an international crowd, as he had claimed that “someday in the future the government might change but that ‘discrediting’ comments might stick in the minds of such an international crowd”. A couple of weeks later, we organized another solidarity event in Pangaea that had the same concept of bake sale as well as an open microphone that involved live musical performances on voluntary basis. The money collected in both of these events in Pangaea was sent equally to organizations in Turkey and Syria. These events helped me to get to know a lot of people that I hadn’t met before, and share moments in solidarity with each other. There are a lot of people that took responsibility in making these events come to life and the least I can do with my writing here is to thank everyone that has a played a role in it…>