19 
The Life and Death of 
Project Camelot 
Irving Louis Horowitz 
In June of this year [1965] -in the midst of 
the crisis over the Dominican Republic -the 
United States Ambassador to Chile sent an 
urgent and angry cable to the State Depart­
ment. Ambassador Ralph Dungan was 
confronted with a growing outburst of anti­
Americanism from Chilean newspapers and ·intellectuals. Further, left-wing members of the 
Chilean Senate had accused the United States 
of espionage. 
The anti-American attacks that agitated 
Dungan had no direct connection with sending 
US troops to Santo Domingo. Their target was 
a mysterious and cloudy American research 
program called Project Camelot. 
Dungan wanted to know from the State 
Department what Project Camelot was all 
about. Further, whatever Camelot was, he 
wanted it stopped because it was fast becom­
ing a cause celebre in Chile (as it soon would 
throughout capitals of Latin America and in 
Washington) and Dungan had not been told 
anything about it -even though it was spon­
sored by the US Army and involved the 
tinderbox subjects of counterrevolution and 
counterinsurgency in Latin America. 
Within a few weeks Project Camelot created 
repercussions from Capitol Hill to the White 
House. Senator J. William Fulbright, chairman 
of the Foreign Relations Committee, registered his personal concern about such projects 
as Camelot because of their "reactiona ry, 
backward-looking policy opposed to change. 
Implicit in Camelot, as in the concept of 'coun­
terinsurgency,' is an assumption that revolu­
tionary movements are dangerous to the 
interests of the United States and that the 
United States must be prepared to assist, if not 
actually to participate in, measures to repress 
them.'' 
By mid-June the State Department and 
Defense Department - which had created and 
funded Camelot - were in open contention 
over the project and the jurisdiction each 
department should have over certain foreign 
policy operations. 
On July 8, Project Camelot was killed by 
Defense Secretary Robert McNamara' s office 
which has a veto power over the military 
budget. The decision had been made under the 
President's direction. 
On the same day, the director of Camelot's 
parent body, the Special Operations Research 
Organization, told a Congressional committee 
that rhe research project on revolution and 
counterins urgency had taken its name from 
King Arthur's mythical domain because "It 
connotes the right sort of things-development 
of a stable society with peace and justice for 
all." Whatever Camelot's outcome, there 
Irving Louis Horowitz, "The Life and Death of Project Camelot," pp. 138-48 from Thomas Weaver (ed.). 
To See Ourselves : Anthropology a11d Modem Socia/ Issues (Glencoe, IL: Scott, Foresman & Co., 1973). Copy­
right © 1973 Scott, Foresman and Company. 

278 IRVING LOUIS HOROWITZ 
should be no mistaking the deep sincerity 
behind this appeal for an applied social science 
pertinent to current policy. 
However , Camelot left a horizon of disarray 
in irs wake: an open dispute between State and 
Defense; fuel for the anti-American fires in 
Latin America; a cut in US Army research 
appropriations. In addition, serious and 
perhaps ominous implications for social 
science research, bordering on censorship, 
have been raised by the heated reaction of the 
executive branch of government. 
Global Counterinsu rgency 
What was Project Camelot? Basically , it was a 
project for measuring and forecasting the 
causes of revolutions and insurgency in under­
developed areas of the world. It also aimed to 
find ways of eliminating the causes, or coping 
with the revolutions and insurgencies. Camelot 
was sponsored by the US Army on a four to 
six million dollar contract, spaced out over 
three to four years, with the Special Opera­
tions Research Organization (SORO). 
This agency is nominally under the aegis of 
American University in Washington, DC, and 
does a variety of research for the Army. This 
includes making analytical surveys of foreign 
areas� keeping up-to-date information on the 
military, poljtical, and social complexes of 
those areas; and maintammg a "rapid 
response" file for getting immediate informa­
tion, upon Army request, on any situation 
deemed militarily important. 
Latin America was the first area chosen for 
concentrated study, but countries on Camelot 's 
four-year list included some in Asia, Africa, 
and Europe. ln a working paper issued on 
December 5, 1964, at the request of the Office 
of the Chief of Research and Development, 
Department of the Army, it was recommended 
that "comparative historical studies" be made 
in these countries: 
(Latin America) Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, 
Colombia, Cuba, Dominican Republic, El Sal­
vador, Guatemala, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, 
Venezuela. 
(Middle East) Egypt, Iran, Turkey. 
(Far East) Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thai­
land. 
(Others) France, Greece, Nigeria. "Survey research and other field studies" were 
recommended for Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, 
Paraguay, Peru, Venezuela, Iran, and Thailand. 
Preliminary consideration was also being given 
to a study of the separatist movement in 
French Canada. It, too, had a code name: 
Project Revolt. 
In a recruiting letter sent to selected schol­
ars all over the world at the end of 1964, 
Project Camelot's aims were defined as a study 
to "make it possible to predict and influence 
politically significant aspects of social change 
in the developing nations of the world." This 
would include devising procedur es for "assess­
ing the potential for internal war within 
national societies" and "identify(ing) with 
increased degrees of confidence, those actions 
which a government might take to relieve con­
ditions which are assessed as giving rise to a 
potential for internal war." The letter further 
stated: "The US Army has an important 
mission in the positive and constructive aspects 
of nation-building in less developed countries 
as well as a responsibility to assist friendly gov­
ernments in dealing with active insurgency 
problems." Such activities by the US Army 
were described as "insurgency prophylaxis" 
rather than the "sometimes misleading label of 
counterins urgency. " 
Project Camelot was conceived in late 1963 
by a group of high-ranking Army officers con­
nected with the Army Research Office of the 
Department of Defense. They were concerned 
about new types of warfare springing up 
around the world. Revolutions in Cuba and 
Yemen and insurgency movements in Vietnam 
and the Congo were a far cry from the battles 
of World War 11 and also different from the 
envisioned -and planned for -apocaly pse of 
nuclear war. For the first time in modern 
warfare, military establishments were not in a 
position to use the immense arsenals at their 
disposal -but were, instead, compelled by 
force of a geopolitical stalemate to increasingly 
engage in primitive forms of armed combat. 
The questions of moment for the Army were: 
Why can't the "hardware" be used? And 
what alternatives can social science "software" 
provide? 
A well-known Latin American area special­
ist, Rex Hopper, was chosen as director of 
Project Camelot. Hopper was a professor of 
sociology and chairman of the department at 

THE LIFE. AND DEATH OF PROJECT CAMELOT 279 
Brooklyn College. He had been to Latin 
America many times over a thirty-year span on 
research projects and lecture tours, including 
some under government sponsorship. He was 
highly recommended for the position by his 
professional associates in Washington and 
elsewhere. Hopper had a long-standing inter­
est in problems of revolution and saw in this 
multimillion dollar contract the possible real­
ization of a life-long scientific ambition. 
The Chilean Debacle 
How did this social science research project 
create a foreign policy furore? And, at another 
level, how did such high intentions result in so 
disastrous an outcome? 
The answers involve a network spreading 
from a professor of anthropology at the Uni­
versity of Pittsburgh, to a professor of sociol­
ogy at the University of Oslo, and yet a third 
professor of sociology at the University of 
. Chile in Santiago, Chile. The "showdown" 
took place in Chile, first within the confines of 
the university, next on the floor of the Chilean 
Senate, then in the popular press of Santiago, 
and finally, behind US embassy walls. 
It was ironic that Chile was the scene of 
wild newspaper tales of spying and academic 
outrage at scholars being recruited for "spying 
missions." For the working papers of Project 
Camelot stipulated as a criterion for study that 
a country "should show promise of high pay­
offs in terms of the kinds of data required." 
Chile did not meet these requirements -it is 
not on the preliminary list of nations specified 
as prospects. 
How then did Chile become involved in 
Project Camelot's affairs? The answer requires 
conside.ration of the position of Hugo G. 
Nutini, assistant professor of anthropology 
at Pittsburgh, citizen of the United States 
and former citizen of Chile. His presence in 
Santiago as a self-identified Camelot represen­
tative triggered the climactic chain of events. 
Nutini, who inquired about an appointment 
in Camelot's beginning stages, never was given 
a regular Camelot appointment. Because he 
was planning a trip to Chile in April of this 
year - on other academic business -he was 
asked to prepare a report concerning possibil­
ities of cooperation from Chilean scholars. In general, it was the kind of survey which 
has mild results and a modest honorarium 
attached to it (Nutini was offered $750). But 
Nutini had an obviously different notion of his 
role. Despite the limitations and precautions 
which Rex Hopper placed on his trip, espe­
cially Hopper's insistence on its informal 
nature, Nutini managed to convey the impres­
sion of being an official of Project Camelot 
with the authority to make proposals to 
prospective Chilean participants. Here was an 
opportunity to link the country of his birth 
with the country of his choice. 
At about the same time, Johan Galtung, a 
Norwegian sociologist famous for his research 
on conflict and conflict resolution in underde­
veloped areas, especially in Latin America, 
entered the picture. Galtung, who was in Chile 
at the time and associated with the Latin 
American Faculty of Social Science (FLACSO), 
received an invitation to participate in a 
Camelot planning conference scheduled for 
Washington, DC, in August 1965. The fee 
to social scientists attending the conference 
would be $2,000 for four weeks. Galtung 
turned down the invitation. He gave several 
reasons. He could not accept the role of the US 
Army as a sponsoring agent in a study of coun­
terinsurgency. He could not accept the notion 
of the Army as an agency of national develop­
ment; he saw the Army as managing conflict 
and even promoting conflict. Finally, he could 
not accept the asymmetry of the project -he 
found it difficult to understand why there 
would be studies of counterins urgency in Latin 
America, but no studies of "counterinterven­
tion" (conditions under which Latin American 
nations might intervene in the affairs of the 
United States). Galtung was also deeply con­
cerned about the possibility of European schol­
ars being frozen out of Latin American studies 
by an inundation of sociologists from the 
United States. Furthermore, he expressed fears 
that the scale of Camelot honoraria would 
completely destroy the social science labor 
market in Latin America. 
Galtung had spoken to others in Oslo, 
Santiago, and throughout Latin America about 
the project, and he had shown the memoran­
dum of December 1964 to many of his 
colleagues. 
Soon after Nurini arrived in Santiago, he 
had a conference with Vice-Chancellor Alvaro 

280 IRVING LOUIS HOROWITZ 
Bunster of the University of Chile to discuss 
the character of Project Camelot. Their second 
meeting, arranged by the vice-chancell or, was 
also attended by Professor Eduardo Fuenzal­
ida, a sociologist. After a half-hour of exposi­
tion by Nutini, Fuenzalida asked him 
pointblank to specify the ultimate aims of the 
project, its sponsors, and its military implica­
tions. Before Nutini could reply, Professor 
Fuenzalida, apparently with some drama, 
pulled a copy of the December 4 circular letter 
from his briefcase and read a prepared Spanish 
translation. Simultaneously , the authorities at 
FLACSO turned over the matter to their asso­
ciates in the Chilean Senate and in the left­
wing Chilean press. 
In Washington, under the political pressures 
of State Department officials and Congres­
sional reaction, Project Camelot was halted in 
midstream, or more precisely, before it ever 
really got under way. When the ambassado r's 
communication reached Washington, there 
was already considerable official ferment about 
Project Camelot. Senators Fulbright, Morse, 
and McCarthy soon asked for hearings by the 
Senate Foreign Relations Commit tee. Only 
an agreement between Secretary of Defense 
McNamara and Secretary of State Rusk to 
settle their differences on future overseas 
research projects forestalled Senate action. Bur 
in the House of Representatives, a hearing was 
conducted by the Foreign Affairs Committee 
on July 8. The SORO director , Theodore 
Vallance, was questioned by committee 
members on the worth of Camelot and the 
matter of military intrusion into foreign policy 
areas. 
That morning, even before Vallance was 
sworn in as a wimess -and without his knowl­
edge -the Defense Department issued a terse 
announcement terminating Project Camelot. 
President Johnson had decided the issue in 
favor of the State Department. In a memo to 
Secretary Rusk on August 5 the President stip­
ulated that "no government sponsorship of 
foreign area research should be undertaken 
which in the judgment of the Secretary of State 
would adversely affect United States foreign 
relations." 
The State Department has recently estab­
lished machinery to screen and judge all 
federally-fina nced research projects overseas. The policy and research consequences of the 
Presidential directive will be discussed later. 
What effect will the cancellation of Camelot 
have on the continuing rivalry between 
Defense and State departments for primacy in 
foreign policy? How will government spon­
sorship of future social science research be 
affected? And was Project Camelot a scholarly 
protective cover for US Army planning -or 
a legitimate research operation on a valid 
research subject independent of sponsorship? 
Let us begin with a collective self-portrait of 
Camelot as the social scientists who directed 
the project perceived it. There seems to be 
general consensus on seven points. 
First, the men who went to work for 
Camelot felt the need for a large-scale, "big 
picture" project in social science. They wanted 
to create a sociology of contemporary rele­
vance which would not suffer from the 
parochial narrowness of vision to which their 
own professional backgrounds had generally 
conditioned them. Most of the men viewed 
Camelot as a bona fide opportunity to do fun­
damental research with relatively unlimited 
funds at their disposal. (No social science 
project ever before had up to $6,000,000 
available.) Under such optimal conditi ons, 
these scholars tended not to look a gift horse 
in the mouth. As one of them put it, there was 
no desire to inquire too deeply as to the source 
of the funds or the ultimate purpose of the 
project. 
Second, most social scientists affiliated with 
Camelot felt that there was actually more 
freedom to do fundamental research under 
military sponsorship than at a university or 
college. One man noted that during the 1950s 
there was far more freedom to do fundamen­
tal research in the RAND corporation (an Air 
Force research organization) than on any 
campus in America. Indeed, once the protec­
tive covering of RAND was adopted, it was 
almost viewed as a society of Platonist elites 
or "knowers" permitted to search for truth 
on behalf of the powerful. In a neoplatonic 
definition of their situation, the Camelot men 
hoped that their ideas would be taken seri­
ously by the wielders of power (although, con­
versely, they were convinced that the armed 
forces would not accept their preliminary 
recommendations). 

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF PROJECT CAME LOT 281 
Third, many of the Camelot associates felt 
distinctly uncomfortable with military spon­
sorship, especially given the present United 
States military posture. But their reaction to 
this discomfort was that "the Army has to be 
educated." This view was sometimes cast in 
Freudian terms: the Army's bent toward vio­
lence ought to be sublimated. Underlying this 
theme was the notion of the armed forces as 
an agency for potential social good -the dis­
cipline and the order embodied by an army 
could be channeled into the process of eco­
nomic and social development in the United 
States as well as in Latin America. 
Fourth, there was a profound conviction in 
the perfectibility of mankind; particularly in 
the possibility of the military establishment 
performing a major role in the general process 
of growth. They sought to correct the intel­
lectual·' paternalism and parochialism under 
which Pentagon generals, State Department 
diplomats, and Defense Department planners 
seemed to operate. 
Fifth, a major long-range purpose of 
Camelot, at least for some of its policy-makers, 
was to prevent another revolutionary holo­
caust on a grand scale, such as occurred in 
Cuba. At the very least, there was a shared 
belief that Pax Americana was severely threat­
ened and its future could be bolstered. 
Sixth, none of them viewed their role on the 
project as spying for the United States govern­
ment, or for anyone else. 
Seventh, the men on Project Camelot felt 
that they made heavy sacrifices for social 
science. Their personal and professional risks 
were much higher than those taken by univer­
sity academics. Government work, whHe 
well-compensated, remains prof essionally 
marginal. It can be terminated abruptly (as 
indeed was the case) and its project directors 
are subject to a public scrutiny not customary 
behind the walls of ivy. 
In the main, there was perhaps a keener 
desire on the part of the directing members 
of Camelot not to "sell out" than there is 
among social scientists with regular academic 
appojntments. This concern with the ethics of 
social science research seemed to be due largely 
to daily confrontation of the problems of 
betrayal, treason, secrecy, and abuse of data, 
in a critical situation. In contrast, even though a university position may be created by 
federally-sponsored research, the connection 
with policy matters is often too remote to 
cause any crise de conscience. 
The Insiders' Report 
Were the men on Camelot critical of any 
aspects of the project? 
Some had doubts from the outset about the 
character of the work they would be doing, 
and about the conditions under which it would 
be done. It was pointed out, for example, that 
the US Army tends to exercise a far more strin­
gent intellectual control of research findings 
than does the US Air Force. As evidence for 
this, it was stated that SORO generally had 
fewer "free-wheeling" aspects to its research 
designs than did RAND (the Air Force­
supported research organization). One critic 
inside SORO went so far as to say that he 
knew of no SORO research which had a 
"playful" or unregimented quality, such as one 
finds at RAND (where for example, comput­
ers are used to plan invasions but also to play 
chess). One staff member said that "the self­
conscious seriousness gets to you after a 
while." "It was all grim stu ff," said another. 
Another line of criticism was that pressures 
on the "reformers" (as the men engaged in 
Camelot research spoke of themselves) to 
come up with ideas were much stronger than 
the pressures on the military to actually bring 
off any policy changes recommended. The 
social scientists were expected to be social 
reformers, while the military adjutants were 
expected to be conservative. It was further felt 
that the relationship between sponsors and 
researchers was not one of equals, but rather 
one of superordinate military needs and sub­
ordinate academic role. On the other hand, 
some officials were impressed by the disinter­
estedness of the military, and thought that far 
from exercising undue influence, the Army per­
sonnel were loath to offer opinions. 
Another objection was that if one had to 
work on policy matters -if research is to have 
international ramifications -it might better be 
conducted under conventional State Depart­
ment sponsorship. "After all,'' one man said, 
"they are at least nominally committed to 

282 IRVING LOUIS HOROWITZ 
civilian political norms., In other words, there 
was a considerable reluctance to believe that 
the Defense Deparnnent, despite its superior 
organization, greater financial affluence, and 
executive influence, would actually improve 
upon State Department styles of work, or 
accept recommendations at variance with 
Pentagon policies. 
There seemed to be few, if any, expressions 
of disrespect for the intrinsic merit of the work 
contemplated by Camelot, or of disdain for 
policy-oriented work in general. The scholars 
engaged in the Camelot effort used two dis­
tinct vocabularies. The various Camelot docu­
ments reveal a military vocabulary provided 
with an array of military justification; often 
followed (within the same document) by a 
social science vocabulary offering social 
science justifications and rationalizations. The 
dilemma in the Camelot literature from the 
preliminary report issued in August 1964 unti( 
the more advanced document issued in April 
1965, is the same: an incomplete amalgama­
tion of the military and sociological vocabu­
laries. (At an early date the project had the 
code name SPEARPOINT.) 
Policy Conflicts Over Camelot 
The directors of SORO are concerned that the 
cancellation of Camelot might mean the end 
of SORO as well in a wholesale slash of 
research funds. For while over $1,000,000 was 
allotted to Camelot each year, the annual 
budget of SORO, its parent organization, is a 
good deal less. Although no such action has 
taken place, SORO's future is being examined. 
For example, the Senate and House Appropri­
ations Committee blocked a move by the Army 
to transfer unused Camelot funds to SORO. 
However, the end of Project Camelot does 
not necessarily imply the end of the Special 
Operations Research Office, nor does it imply 
an end to research designs which are similar in 
character to Project Camelot. ln fact, the ter­
mination of the contract does not even imply 
an intellectual change of heart on the part of 
the _originating sponsors or key figures of the 
proJect. 
One of the characteristics of Project 
Camelot was the number of antagonistic forces it set in motion on grounds of strategy and 
timing rather than from what may be called 
considerations of scientific principles. 
The State Department grounded its opposi­
tion to Camelot on the basis of the ultimate 
authority it has in the area of foreign affairs. 
There is no published report showing serious 
criticism of the projected research itself. 
Congressional opposition seemed to be gen­
erated by a concern not to rock any foreign 
alliances, especially in Latin America. Again, 
there was no statement about the projecrts 
scientific or intellectual grounds. 
A third group of skeptics, academic social sci­
entists, generally thought that Project Camelot, 
and studies of the processes of revolution and 
war in general, were better left in the control of 
major university centers, and in this way, kept 
free of direct military supervision. 
The Army, creator of the project, did 
nothing to contradict McNamara' s order can­
celling Project Camelot. Army influentials did 
not only feel that they had to execute the 
Defense Departme nt's orders, but they are tra­
ditionally dubious of the value of "software" 
research to support "hardware" systems. 
Let us take a closer look at each of these 
groups which voiced opposition to Project 
Camelot. A number of issues did not so much 
hinge upon, as swim about, Project Camelot. 
In particular , the "jurisdictional" dispute be­
tween Defense and State loomed largest. 
State vs. defense 
In substance, the debate between the Defense 
Department and the State Department is not 
unlike that between electricians and bricklay­
ers in the construction of a new apartment 
house. What "union, is responsible for which 
processes? Less generously , the issue is: who 
controls what? At the policy level, Camelot 
was a tool tossed about in a larger power 
struggle which has been going on in govern­
ment circles since the end of World War 11, 
when the Defense Department emerged as a 
competitor for honors as the most powerful 
bureau of the administrative branch of 
government. 
In some sense, the divisions between Defense 
and State are outcomes of the rise of ambigu­
ous conflicts such as Korea and Vietnam, in 

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF PROJECT CAMELOT 283 
contrast to the more precise and diplomatically 
controlled "classical" world wars. What are 
the lines dividing political policy from military 
posture? Who is the most important represen­
tative of the United States abroad: the ambas­
sador or the military attache in charge of the 
military mission? When soldiers from foreign 
lands are sent to the United States for political 
orientation, should such orientation be within 
the province of the State Department or of the 
Defense Department? When undercover activ­
ities are conducted, should the direction of 
such activities belong to military or political 
authorities? Each of these is a strategic ques­
tion with little pragmatic or historic precedent. 
Each of these was entwined in the Project 
Camelot explosion. 
It should be plain therefore that the State 
Department was not simply responding to the 
recommendations of Chilean left-wingers in 
urging the cancellation of Camelot. It merely 
employed the Chilean hostility to "interven­
tionist" projects as an opportunity to redefine 
the balance of forces and power with the 
Defense Department. What is clear from this 
resistance to such projects is not so much a 
defense of the sovereignty of the nations where 
ambassadors are stationed, as it is a contention 
that conventional political channels are 
sufficient to yield the information desired or 
deemed necessary. 
Congress 
In the main, congressional reaction seems to be 
that Project Camelot was bad because it 
rocked the diplomatic boat in a sensitive area. 
Underlying most congressional criticisms is the 
plain fact that most congressmen are more 
sympathetic to State Department control of 
foreign affairs than they are to Defense 
Department control. In other words, despite 
military sponsored world junkets, National 
Guard and State Guard pressures from the 
home State, and military training in the back­
grounds of many congressmen, the sentiment 
for political rather than military control is 
greater. In addition, there is a mounting suspi­
cion in Congress of varying kinds of behav­
ioral science research stemming from hearings 
into such matters as wiretapping, uses of lie 
detectors, and truth-in-packaging. Social scientists 
One reason for the violent response to Project 
Camelot, especially among Latin American 
scholars, is its sponsorship by the Department 
of Defense. The fact is that Latin Americans 
have become quite accustomed to State 
Department involvements in the internal 
affairs of various nations. The Defense Depart­
ment is a newcomer, a dangerous one, inside 
the Latin American orbit. The train of thought 
connected to its activities is in terms of inter­
national warfare, spying missions, military 
manipulations, etc. The State Department, for 
its part, is often a consultative party to shifts 
in government, and has played an enormous 
part in either fending off or bringing about 
coups d'etat. This State Department role has 
by now been accepted and even taken for 
granted. Not so the Defense Department's 
role. But it is interesting to conjecture on 
how matter-of-factly Camelot might have 
been accepted if it had State Department 
sponsorship. 
Social scientists in the United States have, 
for the most part, been publicly silent on the 
matter of Camelot. The reasons for this are not 
hard to find. First, many "giants of the field" 
are involved in government contract work in 
one capacity or another. And few souls are in 
a position to tamper with the gods. Second, 
most information on Project Camelot has thus 
far been of a newspaper variety; and profes­
sional men are not in a habit of criticizing 
colleagues on the basis of such information. 
Third, many social scientists doubtless see 
nothing wrong or immoral in the Project 
Camelot designs. And they are therefore more 
likely to be either confused or angered at the 
Latin American response than at the directors 
of Project Camelot. (At the time of the blowup, 
Camelot people spoke about the "Chilean 
mess" rather than the "Camelot mess.") 
The directors of Project Camelot did not 
"classify" research materials, so that there 
would be no stigma of secrecy. And they also 
tried to hire, and even hired away from 
academic positions, people well known and 
respected for their independence of mind. The 
difficulty is that even though the stigma of 
secrecy was formally erased, it remained in 
the attitudes of many of the employees and 

284 IRVING LOUIS HOROWITZ 
would-be employees of Project Camelot. They 
unfortunately thought in terms of secrecy, 
clearance, missions, and the rest of the pro­
fessional nonsense that so powerfully afflicts 
the Washington scientific as well as political 
ambience. 
Further, it is apparent that Project Camelot 
had much greater difficulty hiring a full-time 
staff of high professional competence, than in 
getting pan-time, summertime, weekend, and 
sundry assistance. Few established figures in 
academic life were willing to surrender the 
advantages of their positions for the risks of 
the project. 
One of the cloudiest aspects to Project 
Camelot is the role of American University. Its 
actual supervision of the contract appears to 
have begun and ended with the 25 percent 
overhead on those parts of the contract that 
a university receives on most federal grants. 
Thus, whjle there can be no question as to the 
.. concern and disappointment" of President . 
Hurst R. Anderson of the American University 
over the demise of Project Camelot, the 
reasons for this regret do not seem to extend 
beyond the formal and the financial. No offi­
cial at American University appears to have 
been willing to make any statement of respon­
sibility, support, chagrin, opposition, or any­
thing else related to the project. The issues are 
indeed momentous, and must be faced by all 
universities at which government sponsored 
research is conducted: the amount of control a 
university has over contract work; the role of 
university officials in the distribution of funds 
from grants; the relationships that ought to be 
established once a grant is issued. There is also 
a major question concerning project directors: 
are they members of the faculty, and if so, do 
they have necessary teaching responsibilities 
and opportunities for tenure as do other 
faculty members. 
The difficulty with American University is 
that it seems to be remarkably unlike other 
universities in its permissiveness. The Special 
Operations Research Office received neither 
guidance nor support from university officials. 
From the outset, there seems to have been a 
.. gentleman's agreement" not to inquire or 
interfere in Project Camelot, but simply to 
serve as some sort of camouflage. If American 
University were genuinely autonomous it might have been able to lend highly supportive 
aid to Project Camelot during the crisis 
months. As it is, American University main­
tained an official silence which preserved it 
from more congressional or executive criti­
cism. This points up some serious flaws in its 
administrative and financial policies. 
The relationship of Camelot to SORO rep­
resented a similarly muddled organizational 
picture. The director of Project Camelot was 
nominally autonomous and in charge of an 
organization surpassing in size and importance 
the overall SORO operation. Yet at the criti­
cal point the organizational blueprint served to 
protect SORO and sacrifice what nominally 
was its limb. That Camelot happened to be a 
vital organ may have hurt, especially when 
Congress blocked the transfer of unused 
Camelot funds to SORO. 
Military 
Military reaction to the cancellation of 
Camelot varied. It should be borne in mind 
that expenditures on Camelot were minimal in 
the Army's overall budget and most military 
leaders are skeptical, to begin with, about the 
worth of social science research. So there was 
no open protest about the demise of Camelot. 
Those officers who have a positive attitude 
toward social science materials, or are them­
selves trained in the social sciences, were 
dismayed. Some had hoped to find "software" 
alternatives to the ''hardware systems" 
approach applied by the Secretary of Defense 
to every rrulitary-political contingency. These 
officers saw the attack on Camelot as a double 
attack -on their role as officers and on their 
professional standards. But the Army was so 
clearly treading in new waters that it could 
scarcely jeopardize the entire structure of 
military research to preserve one project. 
This very inability or impotence to preserve 
Camelot - a situation threatening to other 
governmental contracts with social scientists ­
no doubt impressed many armed forces 
officers. 
The claim is made by the Camelot staff (and 
various military aides) that the critics of the 
project played into the hands of those sections 
of the military predisposed to veto any social 
science recommendations. Then why did the 

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF PROJECT CAMELOT 285 
military offer such a huge support to a social 
science project to begin with? Because 
$6,000,000 is actually a trifling sum for the 
Army in an age of multi-billion dollar military 
establishm ent. The amount is significantly 
more important for the social sciences, where 
such contract awards remain relatively scarce. 
Thus, there were differing perspectives of the 
importance of Camelot: an Army view which 
considered the contract as one of several forms 
of "software" investment; a social science per­
ception of Project Camelot as the equivalent of 
the Manhattan Project. 
Was Project Camelot 
Workable? 
While most public opposition to Project 
Camelot focused on its strategy and timing, a 
considerable amount of private opposition 
centered on more basic, though theoretical, 
questions: was Camelot scientifically feasible 
and ethically correct? No public document or 
statement contested the possibility that, given 
the successful completion of the data gather­
ing, Camelot could have, indeed, established 
basic criteria for measuring the level and 
potential for internal war in a given nation. 
Thus, by never challenging the feasibility of the 
work, the political critics of Project Camelot 
were providing back-handed compliments to 
the efficacy of the project. 
But much more than political considerations 
are involved. It is clear that some of the most 
critical problems presented by Project Camelot 
are scientific. Although for an extensive analy­
sis of Camelot, the reader would, in fairness, 
have to be familiar with all of its documents, 
salient general criticisms can be made without 
a full reading. 
The research design of Camelot was from 
the outset plagued by ambiguities. It was never 
quite settled whether the purpose was to study 
counterinsurgency possibilities, or the revolu­
tionary process. Similarly, it was difficult to 
determine whether it was to be a study of com­
parative social structures, a set of case studies 
of single nations "in depth," or a study of 
social structure with particular emphasis on 
the military. In addition, there was a lack of 
treatment of what indicators were to be used, and whether a given social system in Nation A 
could be as stable in Nation B. 
In one Camelot document there is a general 
critique of social science for failing to deal with 
social conflict and social control. While this in 
itself is admirable, the tenor and context of 
Camelot's documents make it plain that a 
"stable society" is considered the norm no less 
than the desired outcome. The "breakdown of 
social order" is spoken of accusatively. Stabi­
lizing agencies in developing areas are pre­
sumed to be absent. There is no critique of US 
Army policy in developing areas because the 
Army is presumed to be a stabilizing agency. 
The research formulations always assume the 
legitimacy of Army tasks-"if the US Army is 
to perform effectively its parts in the US 
mission of counterinsurgency it must recognize 
that insurgency represents a breakdown of 
social order .... ,. But such a proposition has 
never been doubted -by Army officials or 
anyone else. The issue is whether such break­
downs are in the nature of the existing system 
or a product of conspiratorial movements. 
The use of hygienic language disguises the 
antirevolutionary assumptions under a cloud 
of powder puff declarations. For example, 
studies of Paraguay are recommended 
"because trends in this situation (the Stroess­
ner regime) may also render it unique when 
analyzed in terms of the transition from 'dic­
tatorship' to political stability. " But to speak 
about changes from dictatorship to stability is 
an obvious ruse. In this case, it is a tactic to 
disguise the fact that Paraguay is one of the 
most vicious, undemocratic (and like most 
dictatorships, stable) societies in the Western 
Hemisphere. 
These typify the sort of hygienic sociological 
premises that do not have scientific purposes. 
They illustrate the confusion of commitments 
within Project Camelot. Indeed the very 
absence of emotive words such as revolution­
ary masses, communism, socialism, and capi­
talism only serves to intensify the discomfort 
one must feel on examination of the docu­
ments -since the abstract vocabulary dis­
guises, rather than resolves, the problems of 
international revolution. To have used clearly 
political rather than military language would 
not "justify" governmental support. Further­
more, shabby assumptions of academic 

286 IRVING LOUIS HOROWITZ 
conventionalism replaced innovative orienta­
tions. By adopting a systems approach, the 
problematic, open-ended aspects of the study 
of revolutions were largely omitted; and the 
design of the study became an oppressive curb 
on the study of the problems inspected. 
This points up a critical implication for 
Camelot (as well as other projects). The impor­
tance of the subject being researched does not 
per se determine the importance of the project. 
A sociology of large-scale relevance and refer­
ence is all to the good. It is important that 
scholars be willing to risk something of their 
shaky reputations in helping resolve major 
world social problems. But it is no less urgent 
that in the process of addressing major prob­
lems, the autonomous character of the social 
science disciplines -their own criteria of 
wonhwbile scholarship -should not be aban­
doned. Project Camelot lost sight of this 
"autonomous" social science character. 
It never seemed to occur to its personnel to 
inquire into the desirability for successful revo­
lution. This is just as solid a line of inquiry as 
the one stressed -the conditions under which 
revolutionary movements will be able to over­
throw a government. Furthermore, they seem 
not to have thought about inquiring into the 
role of the United States in these countries. 
This points up the lack of symmetry. The 
problem should have been phrased to include 
the study of "us" as welJ as "them." It is not 
possible to make a decent analysis of a situa­
tion unless one rakes into account the role of 
all the different people and groups involved in 
it; and there was no room in the design for 
such contingency analysis. 
ln discussing the policy impact on a social 
science research project, we should not over­
look the difference between "contract" work 
and "grants." Project Camelot commenced 
with the US Army; that is to say, it was initi­
ated for a practical purpose determined by the 
diem. This differs markedly from the typical 
academic grant in that its sponsorship had 
"built-in" ends. The scholar usually seeks a 
grant; in this case the donor, the Army, 
promoted its own aims. In some measure the ' 
hostility for Project Camelot may be an un-
conscious reflection of this distinction - a dim 
feeling that there was something "non­
academic," and certainly not disinterested, about Project Camelot, irrespective of the 
quality of the scholars associated with it. 
The Ethics of Policy 
Research 
The issue of "scientific rights" versus "social 
myths" is perennial. Some maintain that the 
scientist ought not penetrate beyond legally or 
morally sanctioned limits and others argue 
that such limits cannot exist for science. ln 
treading on the sensitive issue of national 
sovereignty, Project Camelot reflects the 
generalized dilemma. In deference to intelli­
gent researchers, in recognition of them as 
scholars, they should have been invited by 
Camelot to air their misgivings and qualms 
about government {and especially Army-spon­
sored) research -to declare their moral con­
science. Instead, they were mistakenly 
approached as skillful, useful potential 
employees of a higher body, subject to an 
authority higher than their scientific calling. 
What is central is not the political motives 
of the sponsor. For social scientists were not 
being enlisted in an intelligence system for 
"spying'' purposes. But given their profes­
sional standing, their great sense of intellectual 
honor and pride, they could not be 
"employed" without proper deference for their 
stature. Professional authority should have 
prevailed from beginning to end with complete 
command of the right to thrash out the moral 
and political dilemmas as researchers saw 
them. The Army, however respectful and pro­
tective of free expression, was "hiring help" 
and not openly and honestly submitting a 
problem to the higher professional and scien­
tific authority of social science. 
The propriety of the Army to define and 
delimit all questions, which Camelot should 
have had a right to examine, was never placed 
in doubt. This is a tragic precedent; it reflects 
the arrogance of a consumer of intellectual 
merchandise. And this relationship of inequal­
ity corrupted the lines of authority, and pro­
foundly limited the autonomy of the social 
scientists involved. It became clear that the 
social scientist savant was not so much func­
tioning as an applied social scientist as he was 
supplying information to a powerful client. 

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF PROJECT CAMELOT 287 
The question of who sponsors research is 
not nearly so decisive as the question of ulti­
mate use of such information. The sponsorship 
of a project, whether by the United States 
Army or by the Boy Scouts of America, is by 
itself neither good nor bad. Sponsorship is 
good or bad only insofar as the intended out­
comes can be predetermined and the parame­
ters of those intended outcomes tailored to the 
sponsor's expectations. Those social scientists 
critical of the project never really denied its 
freedom and independence, but questioned 
instead the purpose and character of its 
intended results. 
It would be a gross oversimplification, if not 
an outright error, to assume that the theoreti­
cal problems of Project Camelot derive from 
any reactionary character of the project 
designers. The director went far and wide to 
select a group of men for the advisory board, 
the core planning group, the summer study 
group, and the various conference groupings, 
who in fact were more liberal in their orienta­
tions than any random sampling of the socio­
logical profession would likely turn up. 
However , in nearly every page of the various 
working papers, there are assertions which 
clearly derive from American military policy 
objectives rather than scientific method. The 
steady assumption that internal warfare is 
damaging disregards the possibility that a gov­
ernment may not be in a position to take 
actions either to relieve or improve mass con­
ditions, or that such actions as are contem­
plated may be more concerned with reducing 
conflict than with improving conditions. The 
added statements about the United States Army 
and its "important mission in the positive and 
constructive aspects of nation building ... " 
assume the reality of such a function in an 
utterly unquestioning and unconvincing form. 
The first rule of the scientific game is not to 
make assumptions about friends and enemies 
in such a way as to promote the use of differ­
ent criteria for the former and the latter. 
The story of Project Camelot was not a con­
frontation of good versus evil. Obviously , not 
all men behaved with equal fidelity or with 
equal civility. Some men were weaker than others, some more callous, and some more 
stupid. But all of this is extrinsic to the heart 
of the problem of Camelot: What are and are 
not the legitimate functions of a scientist? 
In conclusion, two important points must be 
clearly kept in mind and clearly apart. First, 
Project Camelot was intellectual ly, and from 
my own perspective, ideologically unsound. 
However , and more significantly , Camelot was 
not cancelled because of its faulty intellectual 
approaches. Instead, its cancellation came 
as an act of government censorship, and an 
expression of the contempt for social science 
so prevalent among those who need it most. 
Thus it was political expedience, rather than 
its lack of scientific merit, that led to the 
demise of Camelot because it threatened to 
rock State Department relations with Latin 
America. 
Second, giving the State Department the 
right to screen and approve government­
funded social science research projects on 
other countries, as the President has ordered, 
is a supreme act of censorsh ip. Among the 
agencies that grant funds for such research are 
the National Institutes of Mental Health, the 
National Science Foundation , the National 
Aeronautics and Space Agency, and the Office 
of Education. Why should the State Depart­
ment have veto power over the scientific pur­
suits of men and projects funded by these and 
other agencies in order to satisfy the policy 
needs -or policy failures -of the moment? 
President Johnson's directive is a gross viola­
tion of the autonomous nature of science. 
We must be careful not to allow social 
science projects with which we may vocifer­
ously disagree on political and ideological 
grounds to be decimated or dismantled by 
government fiat. Across the ideological divide 
is a common social science understanding that 
the contemporary expression of reason in pol­
itics today is applied social science, and that 
the cancellation of Camelot, however pleasing 
it may be on political grounds to advocates of 
a civilian solution to Latin American affairs, 
represents a decisive setback for social science 
research. 

