20 
Confronting the Ethics of 
Ethnography: Lessons From 
Fieldwork in Central America 
Philippe Bourgois 
North American Cultural 
Anthropology 
The ethics of anthropological research are too 
complicated and important to be reduced to 
unambiguous absolutes or even perhaps to 
be clearly defined. The human tragedy 
and political dilemmas I encountered in my 
ethnographic fieldwork in Central America 
obliged me to confront the inadequacy and 
internal contradictions of current definitions of 
research ethics in North American anthropol­
ogy. These ethical quandaries arise within 
the epistemological tension imposed by the 
US intellectual tradition of allegedly apolitical 
liberal relativism in opposition to engaged uni­
versalism. In Europe, Latin America, and else­
where this intellectual dichotomy between 
science and politics is not as clearly drawn. 
Indeed, throughout much of the rest of the 
world, engaged scholarly analysis is not only 
legitimate but part of the researcher's "social 
responsibility." 
I am not proposing a systematic political 
economy of North American anthropological 
knowledge, but I do feel that the framing of 
ethical issues in cultural anthropology needs to be understood in the context of the history of 
the development of the discipline in the larger 
society. The eminently political orientation 
of a supposed apolitical commitment to em­
pirical research must be appreciated for its 
internal inconsistencies and ultimate ethical 
poverty. Finally, the emergence in the late 
1980s of the ''post-modernist deconstruc­
tivist" focus on "culture-as-text" within sym­
bolic anthropology as the most attractive 
theoretical tendency among US anthropolo­
gists needs to be placed in the problematic 
context of anthropological ethics in a politi­
cally polarized world. 
In the late 1960s and early 1970s North 
American social scientists began discussing the 
ethical dilemmas faced by fieldworkers study­
ing and living in a world rife with political 
turmoil. Several important edited volumes in 
anthropology were produced on the subject 
(cf. Weaver 1973; Huizer and Mannheim 
1979; Hymes 1972) and major journals 
devoted considerable space to earnest -and 
at rimes polemical -debates by important 
figures in the discipline (cf. Current Anthro­
pology 1968, 9(5):391- 435; 1971, 12(3): 
321-56). 
Philippe Bourgois, "Confronting the Ethics of Ethnography: Lessons From Fieldwork in Central America," 
pp. 110-26 from Faye V. Harrison (ed.), Decolonizing Anthropology: Movi11g Further Toward a11 Anthro­
pology for Ltberation (Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association, 1991). Copyright © 1991 
by the American Anthropologkal Association. 

LESSONS -FROM FIELDWORK IN CENTRAL AMERICA 289 
In an important early volume a dozen 
anthropolo gists from around the world ques­
tioned the historical relationship between the 
development of the discipline in a functionalist 
theoretical framework in Great Britain and the 
political and economic realities of British colo­
nial domination and indirect rule in Africa and 
elsewhere (Asad 1973). This critical reap­
praisal of the roots of the discipline was even 
prominently incorporated in a major cultural 
anthropo logy textbook in 1981 (Keesing 1981: 
481-99). Respected anthropologists in North 
America have denounced the conscious and 
unconscious collaboration of anthropo logy 
with the counterinsur gency agencies of the US 
government - specifically Project Camelot in 
Latin America (Horowitz 1967), Project Agile 
in Thailand (Gough 1973; Jones 1971; Wolf 
and Jorgensen 1970), and the Himalayan 
Border 1 Countries Project in India (Berreman 
1973).1 
The at times polemical debates of the late 
1960s and early 1970s have injected an impor­
tant self-consciousness among US anthropolo­
gists researching far from home. We have come 
a long way from our European forebears (espe­
cially the British) who flew into colonial war 
zones under the auspices of colonial offices 
to interview "natives" and write "how-to­
administer-more-humanely" reports for gov­
ernment bureaucracies intent on increasing 
"administrative" efficiency and lowering costs. 
Today few self-respecting anthropolo gists 
would condone the exercise of anthropoiogy at 
the service of a world superpower or as a com­
plement to espionage. Significantly, however, 
during the 1980s and early 1990s, articles and 
volumes devoted primarily to the politics of 
ethics were relatively scarce with notable ex­
ceptions (Magubane and Faris 1985; Rebel 
1989a, 1989b; Sanadjian 1990). Instead, most 
ethnographers now include a discussion of the 
methodological and personal ethical dilemmas 
they faced during their fieldwork. Most 
recently, when the politics of ethics are referred 
to it is often in the style of the "reflexive 
poetics" of one of the post-modernist ap­
proaches, far removed from effective practice. 
In their deconstruction of domination the post­
modernists risk trivializing the experience of 
oppression. At its worst this "poetics of poli­
tics" degenerates into what the late Robert F. Murphy (1990:331) satirized as "a kind of 
egghead rap-talk" or "thick writing." 
The Disciplin e's Narrow 
Definition of Ethics 
Traditionally our discipline cites a limited 
dimension of ethical dilemmas: We worry 
about whether or not our research subjects 
have truly consented in an "informed" manner 
to our study; we ponder over the honesty 
of our presentation of self; we condemn the 
distortion in the local economy caused by 
the resources we inject into it in the form of 
"informants'" gifts or wages; we are wary of 
the social disapproval foisted on our primary 
informants when they become the objects 
of envy or ridicule from the rest of the com­
munity because of the resources, prestige, or 
shame we bring them; we no longer steal cer­
emonial secrets unapolo getically; we examine 
our emotions introspectively to control our 
ethnocentrism; we uphold cultural relativism 
and avoid unconsciously conveying disrespect 
for traditional institutions and values through 
our lifestyle; we preserve the anonymity of our 
research subjects and host communit ies; we 
feel guilty for violating the privacy of our 
informants and their culture; we worry about 
"scientific colonialism" and our "respons ibil­
ity to the host community" (so we send extra 
copies of our publications to our research site); 
we do not take photographs indiscriminately 
and we do not tape record without obtaining 
prior permission; we discuss the pros and cons 
of consulting forbidden archives or quoting 
from personal diaries and letters; we question 
the ethics of accepting financial support from 
governments and politically biased institu­
tions; we worry about the potential misuse of 
our research material once it has been pub­
lished in the public domain; and finally we 
take care not to jeopardize the access of future 
colleagues to our fieldwork site by our actions 
and publications. 
These are indeed, all vitally important ethical 
issues that we must all confront during field­
work and write-up. But why does the anthro­
pological concern with ethics stop here? 
What about the larger moral and human 
dimensions of the political and economic 

290 PHILIPPE BOURGOIS 
structures ravaging most of the peoples that 
anthropologists have studied historica lly? With 
notable exceptions most North American 
anthropologists do not include the political or 
even the human rights dimension confronting 
the people they research in their discussion of 
"anthropological ethics." In fact the trend has 
been to avoid these issues by a theoretical focus 
on the meaning of signs and symbols outside 
of social context-what Roger Keesing (1987) 
has also criticized methodologica lly as the ten­
dency to impose articulate but intensely sub­
jective and exotic interpretations of religion, 
myth, and cosmology on the people we study; 
and what Hermann Rebel argues are the "ten­
dencies in recent work by anthropologists ... 
to downplay the degradation and terror ex­
perienced by victims of exploitation and 
persecution" ( 1989a: 117). 
The problem with contemporary anthropo­
logical ethics is not merely that the boundaries . 
of what is defined as ethical are too narrowly 
drawn, but more importantly , that ethics can 
be subject to rigid, righteous interpretations 
which place them at loggerheads with over­
arching human rights concerns. How does 
one investigate power relations and fulfill the 
researcher' s obligations to obtain informed 
consent from the powerfu l? What about the 
right to privacy of absentee landlords as a 
social group? It is much more difficult -if not 
impossible -to satisfy the discipline-bound 
anthropological/methodological code of eth­
ics if we anempt to research marginalization 
and oppression, than if we focus on the 
philosophical aesthetics of cosmology. Can we 
analyze the urgent problems faced by our 
research subjects and still obey our disciplin e's 
interpretation of methodological ethics? 
A Moral Imperative to 
Anthropology 
The simple solution so often adopted by 
anthropolo gists is to avoid examining unequal 
power relationships -and to orient their the­
oretical interests towards safer, more tradi­
tionally exotic focuses. In the late 1960s Eric 
Wolf ( 1972l1969]:26 1) admonished anthro­
pology to avoid a "descent into triviality and 
irrelevance" by focusing on large-scale "prob­
lems of power." A logistical imperative could also be 
advanced for why cultural anthropolo gists 
might want to assign priority to an analysis of 
power inequalities in their research. Unlike 
philosophers, literary critics, or art historians, 
we usually study living human beings. Fur­
thermore we differentiate ourselves method­
ologically from other social science and 
humanities disciplines which also study 
humans through our technique of partici­
pant/observation fieldwork. We are not 
allowed to remain at our desks to pore over 
census tracts; we have to venture into every­
day life not just to interview people but to 
actually participate in their daily life and to 
partake of their social and cultural reality. In 
the Third World, therefore, fieldwork offers a 
privileged arena for intensive contact with 
politically imposed human tragedy. Perhaps 
this methodological obligation to be partici­
pant/observers could inject a humanistic praxis 
into our research? Does social responsibi lity 
have to contradict our discipline's commitment 
to cultural relativism? 
A moral argument for theoretical compas­
sion does nor stop at methodological praxis. 
We also have a historical responsibility to the 
particular types of research subjects selected by 
our forebears. Historically our discipline dif­
ferentiated itself from sociology and other 
social sciences by focusing on the "distinctive 
other" (Hymes 1972:31 ). Since our inception 
we have had what Keesing (1987:161) calls a 
"predilection for the exotic'' and what Sidney 
Mintz {1970:14) criticized as a "preoccupation 
with purity." We are most famous for having 
trekked deepest into the remotest corners of 
colonial territories to try to find people 
outside the reach of "civilization." We have 
unabashedly worshipped "the traditional" -
so long as it is in a pristine vacuum. Over the 
past two decades we have begun to remedy our 
ahistorical, disarticulated focus on the partic­
ular. Ethnographies are increasingly situating 
our research in regional contexts. In fact, as 
Carol Smith (1984) notes in an article on the 
Maya in the Western Highlands of Guatemala, 
it has almost become fashionable for anthro­
pologists to bemoan the myopic-community­
study-in-a-vac uum focus of traditional 
anthropolo gy. 
Even when we succeed in finding a particu­
larly remote cultural cranny where a "tradi-

LESSONS FROM FIELDWORK IN CENTRAL AMERICA 291 
tional" people has had only minimal contact 
with the outside world we can safely predict 
that these noble folk will sooner than later be 
sucked into the world economy in a trauma­
tized manner. There is a good chance that their 
land and subsistence base will be stolen; their 
efforts at resistance will be met with violence, 
sometimes genocide; their entrance into the 
labor market will be in the most vulnerable 
niche; if they are hired by a multinational agro­
export company -as they so often are -they 
will be systematically assigned to the labor 
gangs that spray venomous pesticides; if they 
work for a transnational subsidiary exploiting 
mineral resources -as they so often do -they 
will be sent to the bottom of the shafts to con­
tract lung cancer -or worse. If they manage 
to maintain their ancestral lands, when they 
finally start to bring their produce to markets 
they will be obliged to sell at below subsistence 
prices; when they come into contact with the 
dominant ethnic groups and classes of their 
nation they will be ridiculed. ln other words, 
with few exceptions, the traditional, noble, 
and "exotic" subjects of anthropology have 
today emerged as the most malnourished, 
politically repressed, economically exploited 
humans on earth. As a rule of thumb, the 
deeper, more traditional, and more '"isolated" 
the people our forebears studied, the more 
traumatized their lifeways have become today. 
Given that there is virtually no such thing as 
a traditional people disconnected from the 
outside world, then our "traditiona l" field­
work sites should grant us privileged access to 
the massive sector of humanity pinned into the 
world economy's most vulnerable nexus. We 
have chosen to study the wretched of the earth. 
These are the individuals too often condemned 
to periodic famines, to below subsistence­
level incorporation in flooded labor markets, 
ro relocation, dislocation, or more simply 
extermination. Many of our discipline 's former 
research subjects are fighting back in organized 
political movements; but as the Central Amer­
ican experience demonstrates, their struggles 
are prolonged, bloody, and often unsuccessf ul. 
Although as uninvited outsiders it might be 
naive and arrogant for us to think we have any­
thing definitive to offer, we can still recognize 
the ethical challenge. Why do we avoid it? 
In the early 1980s dissertations were written 
on the hermeneutics of shame among the Maya. But how can we understand the 
meaning of that important cultural construct 
if we ignore the tens of thousands of Maya 
massacred by the military at the same time, or 
the hundreds of thousands who migrate each 
year to harvest cotton, sugar cane, and coffee. 
Even if there were no urgent human rights 
imperatives as in the case of the Maya; even if 
there was no extreme economic exploitation 
and subsistence dislocation; there is at least a 
scientific imperative to situate their "webs of 
significance" in the context of what they are 
really doing every day. 
Compassion for the Fourth 
World-Only 
The journals and books that regularly den­
ounce ethnocide and genocide published by 
indigenous rights organizations -such as the 
IWGIA in Copenhagen, Survival International 
in England and France, or Cultural Survival in 
Cambridge, Massachus etts -are a welcome 
exception to the tendency for anthropologists 
to escape a human rights mandate. Signifi­
cantly, however , often these organizations tend 
to legitimize their militance by purposef ully 
narrowing their focus in the classically anthro­
pological manner -in pursuit of the ''noble 
savage." They prefer to denounce genocide 
when it also entails ethnocide. 
ln Central America this theoretical orienta­
tion is referred to as indigenista or "fourth 
worldist." Amerindian culture is seen in a 
manichean manner as the human ideal while 
Hispanic culture is treated as irrelevant at best. 
This indigenista tendency is most prevalent 
among North American anthropologists, and 
one can recognize its intellectual roots in the 
discipline's traditional focus on exotic, isolated 
community studies. 
Although guided by a moral vision to 
denounce human rights abuse, fourth world­
ists tend to ignore international geo-political 
contexts because of their geographically and 
culturally reductionist theoretical focus. This 
leads to arbitrary compassion; for example, I 
published a brief account of the poisoning of 
Guaymi Indian banana workers who spray 
pesticides for the United Fruit Company in 
a special issue of a French fourth worldist 
journal documenting the human rights 

292 PHILIPPE BOURGOIS 
violations of indigenous peoples in Central 
America (Bourgois 1986). The editors would 
not have been interested in the article had the 
poisoned sprayers been Hispanic mestizoes 
rather than Amerindians. In fact they decided 
not to publish anything on massacres in the 
Salvadoran countryside because the peasants 
being killed were not Amerindians. Ironically 
only two generations ago most of the grand­
parents of these "Hispanic" Salvadoran rural 
dwellers currently being massacred were Pipils. 
They were forced to abandon their traditional 
language, dress, and indigenous culture when 
the government began systematically killing all 
indigenous peoples -between 18,000 and 
30,000 individuals were massacred -follow­
ing an Amerindian rebellion in 1932. 
Fourth worldists provide vitally needed doc­
umentation of tragic human rights violations 
but they often fail to make common cause with 
human beings. They discriminate according 
to ethnicity, reproducing the traditional . 
anthropological focus on the "exotic other" in 
a vacuum. This obscures their theoretical 
understanding of the structural roots of repres­
sion and exploitation by framing it exclusively 
in manichean culturalist terms. 
Fieldwork in Central 
America 
At war in Nicaragua's Moskitia 
Let me document this critique in a classically 
anthropological manner -by drawing on my 
own fieldwork experience. My first stop in 
pursuit of a dissertation topic was Nicaragua 
in 1979 just after the overthrow of Somoza by 
the Sandinisras (Bourgois 1981 ). Like a good 
anthropologist, I went as far away from the 
capital city as possible into the Moskitia, the 
most remote corner of the only province where 
an indigenous population -the M.iskitu -were 
said to have maintained organically their 
non-Hispanic culture. Their language, reli­
gious system, cultural identity, structure of 
land tenure, etc., was indeed distinct from the 
national Hispanic mainstream. Of course, the 
historical record reveals that there is nothing 
"traditional"' or isolated about Amerindian 
culture in the Moskitia. The Miskitu emerged as a people distinct from their Sumu 
Amerindian neighbors in the 1600s through 
the colonial confrontation of the two great 
superpowers of the time -Spain and England. 
They allied themselves with British pirates -
and later with Her Majesty herself -to fight 
off the Spanish conquerors. In the process 
they became the first indigenous people to 
obtain firearms. This enabled them to conquer 
all their aboriginal neighbors. They became 
warriors and economic middlemen selling 
Amerindian slaves and smuggled trade goods 
from the Central American mainland to British 
settlers in the Caribbean. Some of this histor­
ical legacy has been frozen linguistica lly-one­
third of the words in their "traditional, 
language, for example, bear a relationship to 
English {Holm 1978). 
Soon after I arrived in the heartland of 
Miskitu territory, the indigenous population 
began mobilizing to defend their historic rights 
to land and autonomy in a tragic alliance with 
the Central Intelligence Agency. "My" field­
work village, accessible only by a full-day's 
journey upstream in a dug-out canoe, became 
the central arena of a bloody conflict against 
the central government. Although the un­
derlying causes for this indigenous war were 
the historical structures of racism and margin­
alization of the region dating back to the 
colonial period, and repression by the central 
government during the contemporary period, 
the actual bloody logistics of the fighting was 
sponsored economically and was escalated 
militarily by the US government. 
My theoretical training in anthropological 
approaches to political economy and history 
prepared me to deal with understanding who 
the Miskitu were -why there wa� nothing 
"traditional" about them -and why they 
might rise up in arms against their central 
government. I was completely unprepared, 
however, for what to do on the more impor­
tant practical human level. Should I publish 
my material or would CIA analysts perusing 
academic journals seize upon my information 
to refine counterinsurgency operations the 
way monographs by unsuspecting -and not 
so unsuspecting -anthropologists working in 
Indochina were abused in Southeast Asia 
during the Vietnam War? {cf. discussion by 
Jones 1971 and the preface to Condominas 

LESSONS FROM FIELDWORK IN CENTRAL AMERIC A 293 
1977.) When I discussed these issues at pro­
fessional societies in the US context I was 
"being political" or I was "outside the realm 
of anthropology." If I went to the media I was 
by definition no longer an academic researcher 
-or worse yet-I was a political activist posing 
as an anthropologist. If we are to be logically 
consistent to our discipline's position on hon­
esty of self-presentation should we punish the 
closet human rights activists as firmly as we 
condemn the counterrevolutionary spy? 
Peasant massacre in El Salvador 
My next aborted fieldwork experience proved 
to be even more painful and even more "po­
litical." Having been a participa nt/observer 
among a people who went through an extra­
ordinarily rapid political mobilization, I 
entered1 the robust, interdisciplinary debate on 
peasant political mobilization. Anthropolo gy's 
tradition of participant/observation fieldwork 
encouraged me to try to live among radicalized 
peasants rather than limit myself to examining 
their vital statistics from the vantage point of 
historical archives or census tract statistics. 
Indeed, I felt this lack of fieldwork data to be 
a crucial limitation of much of the literature 
published in political science, sociology, and 
history on peasant revolts. 
With this in mind I went to explore the 
possibility of fieldwork in a Salvadoran 
refugee camp in Honduras (Bourgois 1982). 
My central ethical concern was that coun­
terinsurgency experts would have access to my 
eventual publications and that I might unwit­
tingly contribute to more efficient repression in 
the long run. I was also concerned lest I attract 
attention to refugee political leaders merely by 
being seen talking to them regularly . Because 
of these problems, I initially canceled my field­
work plans, but on second thought I decided 
that the potential of the research warranted at 
least a preliminary feasibility investigation. 
In my exploratory visits to the refugee 
camps, I was surprised to learn that the 
refugees desperately wanted foreigners to 
reside in the camps with them. They sought 
out my company because a foreign witness 
deters local military officials from engaging in 
random abuses. They assured me that far from 
placing them in danger, my physical presence granted them a measure of security. The 
church and United Nations organizations 
operating the camps were also interested in 
having an anthropologist present on a long­
term basis. They pointed out that, as a full­
time researcher , I would also be in an ideal 
position to document human rights abuses and 
to help receive civilians continuing to flee gov­
ernment search and destroy operations just 
across the border. In fact, all the human rights 
workers I spoke with urged me to stay and 
undertake my study in the camps. 
This did not remedy the problem of the 
potential misuse of my published research. 
Several refugees suggested I cross the border 
into El Salvador and discuss this complicated 
issue with the fighters and sympathizers who 
remained in their home communities. (I think 
the refugees also hoped that a brief visit on my 
part would end my repeated uninformed ques­
tions on such obvious facts as the distance 
between their houses or the fertility of their 
fields.) Although CIA analysts probably collect 
most theoretical studies on peasant politiciza­
tion in Central America, I thought one manner 
of reducing the practical counterin surgency 
value of such research would be to delay pub­
lication -aside from periodic human rights 
reports -until the political and military situa­
tion had changed sufficiently to limit the 
applicability of my data. The theoretical ques­
tions I would be exploring were already a part 
of the rigorous scholarly debate on revolu­
tionary peasants in the social sciences. Was 
that entire debate to be dropped from social 
science research for fear of raising the analytic 
capabilities of the CIA? 
To abbreviate a long story, a few days after 
my arrival, while I was still debating this issue 
a group of peasants planning to cross into El 
Salvador a few hours later offered to let me 
accompany them. I impetuously- in retrospect 
unwisely -jumped at the opportun ity. My 
intent was to stay in El Salvador for only 48 
hours. I thought conversations with peasants 
and fighters in the war zone would help me 
come to a final decision as to whether or not 
extended fieldwork in the refugee camps in 
Honduras was feasible and-more importantly 
-ethically defensible. 
My 48 hour visit to El Salvador was pro­
longed into a fourteen day nightmare when the 

294 PHILIPPE BOURGOIS 
Salvadoran military launched a search and 
destroy operation against the region. The gov­
ernment forces surrounded a 40 square kilo­
meter region (approximately a dozen hamlets) 
and began systematically bombarding, mor­
taring, and strafing the entire zone with air­
planes, Huey helicopters, and anillery. There 
were approximately a thousand peasants living 
in the area and only one or two hundred of 
these had guns and probably less than a do­
zen were formal members of the FMLN. The 
population was composed of a typical cross­
section of peasants -the kind of people you 
would find anywhere in rural Latin America if 
you circled off 40 square kilomet ers: grand­
mothers, grandfathers, young and middle-aged 
men and women, pregnant mothers, suckling 
infants, children etc .... We were aU the target 
of the Salvadoran air force and army. 1 gave 
the following oral account to a journalist 
shortly after my return to the US: 
When the bombardments and strafings began 
we would take over anywhere we could. I 
was told to crouch beside a tree trunk and, 
whatever I did, not to move. They'd shoot at 
anything that moved. I remember inching 
around a tree trunk to keep something solid 
between me and the machine-gun fire of the 
helicopters. 
Sometimes the mortar shots came 10 times 
in a row, and there's a tremendous sense of 
panic when you hear them getting closer and 
closer. I was told that when I heard a mortar 
fired I should grit my teeth and keep my 
mouth open to prevent my ear drums from 
rupturing .... On the first four days, ... 
about 15 men, women and children ... were 
wounded. Shrapnel was removed, and ampu­
tations were performed with absolutely no 
pain medicine. (Washington Post February 
14, 1982 pp. C1) 
On tbe founh night of the invasion we tried 
to break through the government troops encir­
cling us. The plan was for the FMLN fighters 
(i.e., younger peasants with guns and minimal 
military training) to draw fire from a machine 
gun nest set up by the government soldiers on 
a knoll while the rest of us civilians tried to 
run by unseen in the darkness of the njght. 
Once again, there were about a thousand of us 
all ages, several pregnant, others sick, one 
blind, and many under three years of age: We were on a rocky path with a Salvadoran 
gunpost off to our left. FMLN guerrillas, also 
on our left and to the rear, drew fire while we 
made a break for it. The babies the women 
were carrying were shrieking at the noise 
and, as soon as we got within earshot, the 
Salvadoran forces turned their fire on us. 
At this point, it was pandemonium. Grenades 
were landing around us; machine guns were 
firing; we were running. A little boy about 20 
yards ahead of me was blown in half when a 
grenade landed on him. His body lay in the 
middle of the path, so I had to run over it to 
escape. (Ibid.) 
I remember at one point being crouched 
near a women under cover of some bushes 
when her baby began to cry. She waved at me 
with her hand and whispered to me to run 
away as fast as possible before the government 
soldiers heard the noise. I obeyed, and sprint­
ing forward I heard machine gun bullets and 
shrieks all around me. Mothers and infants 
made up the bulk of the casualties that night. 
Only a mother can carry her baby under fire 
because only a mother has a chance of pre­
venting her suckling infant from crying. The 
Salvadoran military was shooting in the dark­
ness into the sound of crying babies. 
Six to seven hundred of us managed to 
sprint past the machine gun nest. For the next 
fourteen days, we stayed together running at 
night and hiding during the day: 
One of the major hazards we always faced was 
the noise of crying babies and the moans of 
the wounded, making the whole group vulner­
able to detection. Rags were stuffed in the 
mouths of the wounded, so their cries would 
not be heard. The babies cried a lot because 
they were hungry; their mothers' milk had 
dried up. 
A young woman gave birth on the second 
night of our flight. She was up and running 
for her life the next day, along with the rest of 
us. Those of us who were young and healthy 
were lucky. It was the law of survival at its 
cruelest: the slow runners and the elderly were 
killed. (Ibid.) 
At one point we crossed back through the vil­
lages we had fled out of: 
... we were hit with the overpowering stench 
of decaying bodies. There were donkeys, pigs, 

LESSONS FROM FIELDWORK IN CENTRAL AMERICA 295 
horses, chickens -all dead. The soldiers had 
burned down as many of the houses as they 
could, ripped apart the granaries, it even 
looked as if they had tried to trample the 
fields. (Ibid.) 
... [We] came upon the naked body of a 
middle-aged woman. Her clothes had been 
ripped off and apparently acid had been 
poured on her skin because it was bubbling 
off. The body had been left in a prominent 
position along the path, presumably to ter­
rorize any survivors. (Bourgois 1982:21) 
The academic reaction 
That was the end of my fieldwork on ideology 
and material reality among revolutionary peas­
ants. It was also almost the end of my anthro­
pological career, after I sought out the media 
and human rights lobbyists on Capitol Hill to 
present 1 my testimony to the public. I had 
violated several of the anthropologicaU 
methodological ethics discussed earlier along 
with the specific duties of a graduate student to 
keep his/her academic advisors informed of a 
change in research plans. A strong argument 
was made to terminate me as a graduate student 
-and with abundant justification according to 
the anthropological ethics I had broken: I had 
crossed a border illegally thereby violating the 
laws of my host country government; I had not 
notified my dissertation commit tee of my deci­
sion to explore a new dangerous research site; 
I had notified the media and contacted human 
rights organizations thereby violating the right 
to privacy of my research subjects; I had poten­
tially jeopardized the future opportunities of 
colleagues to research in Honduras and El 
Salvador by breaking immjgration laws and 
calling attention to government repression in 
public forums. 
Significa ntly, had I not gone to the media 
with my testimony of human rights violations 
anthropological ethics would not have been 
violated in as serious a manner. It would have 
remained a personal story between my com­
mittee and myself as an unsuccessful and reck­
less preliminary fieldwork exploration that 
had been decided against as too dangerous. By 
remaining silent I would not have violated 
anyone' s rights to privacy nor have threatened 
my colleagues' access to the field, nor offended 
my host country government. Of course my personal sense of moral 
responsibil ity obliged me to provide public tes­
timony and I entered the media/political arena. 
I discovered that a North American anthro­
pologist is not supposed to document human 
rights violations if it involves violating a host 
country governmen t's laws or contravenes the 
informed consent and right to privacy of the 
parties involved. In other words, anthropol­
ogy's ethics can be interpreted at loggerheads 
with humanity's common sense. I could have 
crossed into FMLN territory as a journalist or 
as a human rights activist but not as an anthro­
pologist because access to the information I 
was seeking was only available by crossing a 
border illegally; publicizing that information 
also violated a people's right to privacy and 
informed consent. Subsequently , lobbying to 
change US foreign policy exacerbates these 
transgressions since political denunciation ts 
not conduct befitting an anthropologist. 
To reiterate, the problem is rooted in a 
specifica lly North American epistemology of 
relativism and ''value-free science" which 
forbids engaged research and -when taken 
to its logical conclusion -denies absolute 
assertions including those of universal human 
rights. This alleged "apolitical" orientation 
expresses itself within US academia in a phobic 
relationship to the media and in a righteous 
condemnation of "political activism ." In con­
trast to Europe -especially France - where 
political militance and an occasional Op Ed 
in Le Monde is a sign of academic prestige 
(Bourdieu 1984 ), in the US, newspaper edito­
rials and magazine articles are often inter­
preted as an indication of lack of serious 
commitment to science. While we do have to 
be cautious of sacrificing analytical rigor by 
becoming too immersed in media presenta­
tions and political polemics are we supposed 
to keep our human righrs denunciarions our of 
the public domain in the name of anthropo­
logical ethics and scientific rigor?1 
It is important that the discipline enforce the 
tenets of informed consent and respect for host 
country governments. Taken out of context, 
however , these academic requisites obscure the 
political and economic realities of the regions 
where we have traditionally been most active. 
A research project which investigates struc­
tures of inequality wilJ have a hard time 

296 PHILIPPE BOURGO IS 
passing a human subjects review board if the 
canons of anthropological ethics are rigidly 
applied. Are we supposed to abandon contro­
versial research? Most political economy stud­
ies can be defined as potentially unethicaL A 
fieldworker cannot obtain important informa­
tion on unequal power relations by strictly 
obeying the power structure's rules and laws 
(cf. Nader 1972:303f f). How does one obtain 
meaningful information on peasant/landlord 
relations if the landlord is required to provide 
truly informed consent? What are the limits 
to "informed consent" in settings of highly 
unequal power relations? Do we have to notify 
absentee landlords prior to interviewing share­
croppers on their estates? Are we allowed to 
obtain jobs in factories in order to document 
union repression? Did I have an obligation to 
obtain informed consent from the Salvadoran 
government troops firing at us before pho­
tographing the children they wounded? Where 
does one draw the line? Does one abandon 
urgent research simply because a dictatorial 
host nation government does not want its 
repressive political system to be documented? 
How does one decide whether a host country 
government is sufficiently repressive to war­
rant breaking its laws? These unresolved ques­
tions reveal that there is nothing apolitical 
about the North American commitment to rel­
ativism and to its methodologically defined 
body of ethics. Most dramatically, the ethic of 
informed consent as it is interpreted by human 
subjects review boards at North American uni­
versities implicitly reinforces the political 
status quo. Understood in a real world con­
text:, rhe entire logic of anthropology's ethics 
is premised on a highly political assenjon that 
unequal power relations are nor particularly 
relevant ro our research. 
Informed consent: United Fruit 
Company versus banana workers 
For my final dissertation fieldwork project, I 
purposefully selected a host country which was 
free of civil-political strife; nevertheless, the 
same ethical contradictions arose. I studied 
ethnic relations on a United Fruit Company 
banana plantation spanning the Costa Rica/ 
Panama border (Bourgois 1988, 1989). My 
first obvious problem was that the transna-tiona! corporation had redefined the border, 
and the plantation's operations illegally strad­
dled Panama and Costa Rjca. My real host 
country "government," therefore, turned out 
to be the United Fruit Company -not Costa 
Rica or Panama. High level United Fruit 
Company officials considered my topic -"a 
history of the ethnicity of the population in the 
plantation region" -innocuously "anthropo­
logical" and ordered local plantation officials 
to graciously open their confidential files to 
me. I was even allowed to reside in workers' 
barracks for some 16 months. Had manage­
ment's consent been truly informed and had 
the Company understood what a historical 
analysis of ethnicity in a plantation context 
would reveal, I would not have been allowed 
to document systematically the transnational's 
quasi-apartheid labor hierarchy; its ethnic 
·discrimination on occupational safety issues; 
or its destruction of the union movement by 
ethnic recruitment etc. The head managers 
would nor have toured me through their golf 
course, drunk whiskey with me, and made 
racist comments about their workers to me if 
they had realJy understood anthropological 
participant/observation research technique. 
Although I was never overtly dishonest; and 
although I always precisely explained my 
research topic to everyone; they obviously did 
not understand my research implications or 
they would have run me out of the area and/or 
beaten me up. 
In fact, participant/observation fieldwork by 
its very definition dangerously stretches the 
anthropological ethic of informed consent. We 
obviously have an obligation to let the people 
we are researching know that they are being 
studied and that a book and/or ,articles will 
eventually be written ·about them. Further­
more, we have to explain as precisely as pos­
sible the focus of our study. At the same time, 
we are taught in our courses preparatory to 
fieldwork that the gifted researcher must break 
the boundaries between outsider and insider. 
We are supposed to "build rapport" and 
develop such a level of trust and acceptance in 
our host societies that we do not distort social 
interaction. Anything less leads to the collec­
tion of skewed or superficial data. How can 
we reconcile effective participant/observation 
with truly "informed consent"? Is rapport 

LESSONS FROM FIELDWORK IN CENTRAL AMERICA 297 
building a covert way of saying "encourage 
people to forget that you are constantly 
observing them and registering everything they 
are saying and doing"? Technically , to main­
tain truly informed consent we should inter­
rupt controversial conversations and activities 
-Miranda act style -to remind everyone that 
everything they say or do may be recorded in 
fieldwork notes. 
Experienced fieldworkers usually advise 
novice ethnographers not to take notes in 
public while undertaking fieldwork. Is that a 
false presentation of self? Is good participant­
observation fieldwork inconsistent with anth­
ropological ethics? Where do we draw the 
line? Are we allowed to research illegal oper­
ations? Do we systematically have to avoid fre­
quenting the rich and powerful who regularly 
bend and break laws? Once again, these 
importdnt ethical dilemmas become even more 
pronounced when we are focusing on conflict 
and unequal power relations. 
Theoretical Context 
I hope I have not raised these issues in too 
moralistic and righteous a tone. Anthropolo­
gists do not have to convert themselves into 
human rights activists and political cadre for 
"worthy" causes in order to remain ethical 
persons. Although perhaps another -arguably 
more consistent -way of reformulating anth­
ropological ethics would be to require that our 
studies among the "poor and powerless" con­
tribute to their empowerment. That would cer­
tainly be different from the current practice of 
requiring "ethical researchers" to obtain the 
informed consent of landlords and military 
bureaucracies. Nevertheless, this discussion of 
our human responsibility to our research sub­
jects does not imply that we automatically 
have something concrete to offer in their strug­
gles for survival or for political rights. We are 
outsiders; and we have a formidable capacity 
unwittingly by our mere presence to cause 
trouble or to complicate matters seriously. 
Symbolic studies of all kinds are important 
for the vitality of anthropology just as is liter­
ary and artistic criticism, folklore, and philos­
ophy for understanding the most important dimensions of humanit y. From a more spe­
cifically political perspective, interpretative, 
post-modernist studies have potentially eman­
cipating insights to offer us. They have identi­
fied axes of domination which have been 
inadequately worked out by Marxists. There 
have been many important exploratory articles 
dealing from a symbolic perspective with the 
meaning of violence and political repression 
(d. Falla 1983; Taussig 1984 ). More squarely 
within the post-modernist movements, femi­
nist theoreticians such as Donna Haraway 
(1988) with her call for "situated knowledges" 
have advocated politically commit ted research. 
There are also voices from inside anthropolo gy 
calling colleagues to task for ignoring histories 
of explosively repressive status quo's in pursuit 
of vigorously essentialist visions of isolated 
Indians (Starn 1991). Similarly, interpretive 
anthropologists and sociologists from histori­
cally dominat ed ethnic groups have challenged 
intellectuals to confront the content of racism 
in creative ways (Gilroy 1987, Limon 1989, 
Rosaldo 1990, Santamaria 1986). 
Nevertheless, in our explosive real world 
context, practitioners of the post-modernist 
deconstructivist movements within anthro­
pology can be more confident than can most 
political economy-oriented ethnographers that 
their publications will not cause absentee land­
lords to unleash the secret police on their 
respondents; nor are their future colleagues 
as likely to be barred by host governments 
because of how they interpreted the poetics of 
power. All of us, regardless of our theoretical 
orientation, need to reexamine the place of 
human concern in our pursuit of science 
among the starving and the persecuted. Let us 
not be political when we claim to be apolitical 
in the name of ethics; and vice versa let us not 
allow our "politics" to stagnate behind sensi­
tive rhetoric. 
It would be dangerous and arrogant to think 
that there are definite answers to any of these 
ethicaUmoral questions. We need to discuss 
them and think about them in both practical 
and theoretical terms. Meanwhile, however, as 
all of us (without exception) wallow in a phe­
nomenological swamp of signs and symbols 
we should not forget that our "informants" 
continue to be crucified. 

