23 
Code of Ethics 
American Anthropological Association 
Preamble 
Anthrbpological researchers, teachers and 
practitioners are members of many different 
communiti es, each with its own moral rules or 
codes of ethics. Anthropolo gists have moral 
obligations as members of other groups, such 
as the family, religion, and commun ity, as well 
as the profession. They also have obligations 
to the scholarly discipline, to the wider society 
and culture, and to the human species, other 
species, and the environment. Furthermore, 
fieldworkers may develop close relationships 
with persons or animals with whom they 
work, generating an additional level of ethical 
considerations. 
In a field of such complex involvements and 
obligations, it is inevitable that misunder­
standings, conflicts, and the need to make 
choices among apparently incompatible values 
will arise. Anthropolo gists are responsible for 
grappling with such difficulties and struggling 
to resolve them in ways compatible with the 
principles stated here. The purpose of this 
Code is to foster discussion and education. The 
American Anthropolo gical Association (AAA) 
does not adjudicate claims for unethical 
behavior . 
The principles and guidelines in this Code 
provide the anthropologist with tools to engage in developing and maintammg an ethical 
framework for all anthropological work. 
II Introduction 
Anthropology is a multidisciplinar y field of 
science and scholarship, which includes the 
study of all aspects of humankind -archaeo­
logical, biological, linguistic and sociocultural. 
Anthropology has roots in the natural and 
social sciences and in the humanities, ranging 
in approach from basic to applied research and 
to scholarly interpretation. 
As the principal organization representing 
the breadth of anthropolo gy, the American 
Anthropological Association (AAA) starts 
from the position that generating and appro­
priately utilizing knowledge (i.e., publishing, 
teaching, developing programs, and informing 
policy) of the peoples of the world, past and 
present, is a wonhy goal; that the generation 
of anthropological knowledge is a dynamic 
process using many different and ever-evolving 
approaches; and that for moral and practical 
reasons, the generation and utilization of 
knowledge should be achieved in an ethical 
manner. 
The mission of the American Anthropologi­
cal Association is to advance all aspects of 
American Anthropological Association, Code of Ethics of the American Aflthro pological Association 
(Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association, 1998). Copyright © 1998 by the American 
Anthropological Association. 

326 AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGICAL ASSOCIATI ON 
anthropological research and to foster dis­
semination of anthropological knowledge 
through publications, teaching, public educa­
tion, and application. An important part of 
that mission is to help educate AAA members 
about ethical obligations and chall enges 
involved in the generation, dissemination, and 
utilization of anthropological knowledge. 
The purpose of this Code is to provide AAA 
members and other interested persons with 
guidelines for making ethical choices in the 
conduct of their anthropological work. 
Because anthropologists can find themselves in 
complex situations and subject to more than 
one code of ethics, the AAA Code of Ethics 
provides a framework, not an ironclad 
formula, for making decisions. 
Persons using the Code as a guideline for 
making ethical choices or for teaching are 
encouraged to seek out illustrative examples 
and appropriate case studies to enrich their 
knowledge base. 
Anthropologists have a duty to be informed 
about ethical codes relating to their work, 
and ought periodically to receive training on 
current research activities and ethical issues. In 
addition, departments offering anthropology 
degrees should include and require ethical 
training in their curriculums. 
No code or set of guidelines can anticipate 
unique circumstances or direct actions in spe­
cific situations. The individual anthropologist 
must be willing to make carefully considered 
ethical choices and be prepared to make clear 
the assumptions, facts and issues on which 
those choices are based. These guidelines 
therefore address general contexts, priorities 
and relationships which should be considered 
in ethicaJ decision making in anthropological 
work. 
Ill Research 
In both proposing and carrying out research, 
anthropological researchers must be open 
about the purpose{s), potential impacts, and 
source(s) of support for research projects with 
funders, colleagues, persons studied or pro­
viding information, and with relevant parties 
affected by the research. Researchers must 
expect to utilize the results of their work in an appropriate fashion and disseminate the 
results through appropriate and timely activi­
ties. Research fulfilling these expectations is 
ethical, regardless of the source of funding 
(public or private) or purpose (i.e., "applied," 
"basic," "pure," or "proprieta ry"). 
Anthropo logical researchers should be alert 
to the danger of compromising anthropologi­
cal ethics as a condition to engage in research, 
yet also be alert to proper demands of good 
citizenship or host-guest relations. Active con­
tribution and leadership in seeking to shape 
public or private sector actions and policies 
may be as ethicalJy justifiable as inaction, 
detachment, or noncooperation, depending on 
circumstances. Similar principles hold for 
anthropological researchers employed or oth­
erwise affiliated with nonanthropol ogical 
institutions, public institutions, or private 
enterprises. 
A Responsibility to people and 
animals with whom 
anthropological researchers 
work and whose lives and 
cultures they study 
1 Anthropological researchers have 
primary ethical obligations to the people, 
species, and materials they study and to the 
people with whom they work. These obliga­
tions can supersede the goal of seeking new 
knowledge, and can lead to decisions not to 
undertake or to discontinue a research project 
when the primary obligation conflicts with 
other responsibilities, such as those owed to 
sponsors or clients. These ethical obligations 
include: 
• To avoid harm or wrong, understanding 
that the development of knowledge can 
lead to change which may be positive or 
negative for the people or animals worked 
with or studied 
• To respect the well-being of humans and 
nonhuman primates 
• To work for the long-term conservation of 
the archaeological, fossil, and historical 
records 
• To consult actively with the affected indi­
viduals or group(s), with the goal of estab-

CODE OF ETHICS 327 
lishing a working relationship that can be 
beneficial to all parties involved 
2 Anthropological researchers must do 
everything in their power to ensure that their 
research does not harm the safety, dignity, or 
privacy of the people with whom they work, 
conduct research, or perform other profes­
sional activities. Anthropological researchers 
working with animals must do everything in 
their power to ensure that the research does 
not harm the safety, psychological well-being 
or survival of the animals or species with 
whlch they work. 
3 Anthropological researchers must deter­
mine in advance whether their hosts/ 
providers of information wish to remain 
anonymous or receive recognition, and make 
every effort to comply with those wishes. 
Researchers must present to their research par­
ticipants the possible impacts of the choices, 
and make clear that despite their best efforts, 
anonymity may be compromised or recogni­
tion fail to materialize. 
4 Anthropological researchers should 
obtain in advance the informed consent of 
persons being studied, providing information, 
owning or controlling access to material being 
studied, or otherwise identified as having inter­
ests which might be impacted by the research. 
It is understood that the degree and breadth of 
informed consent required will depend on the 
nature of the project and may be affected by 
requirements of other codes, laws, and ethics 
of the country or community in which the 
research is pursued. Further, it is understood 
that the informed consent process is dynamic 
and continuous; the process should be initiated 
in the project design and continue through 
implementation by way of dialogue and nego­
tiation with those studied. Researchers are 
responsible for identifying and complying with 
the various informed consent codes, laws and 
regulations affecting their projects. Informed 
consent, for the purposes of this code, does 
not necessarily imply or require a particular 
written or signed form. It is the quality of the 
consent, not the format, that is relevant. 
5 Anthropological researchers who have 
developed close and enduring relationships 
(i.e., covenantal relationships) with either indi­
vidual persons providing information or with 
hosts must adhere to the obligations of open-ness and informed consent, while carefully and 
respectf ully negotiating the limits of the rela­
tionship. 
6 While anthropol ogists may gain person­
ally from their work, they must not exploit 
individuals, groups, animals, or cultural or 
biological materials. They should recognize 
their debt to the societies in which they work 
and their obligation to reciprocate with people 
studied in appropriate ways. 
B Responsibility to scholarship 
and science 
1 Anthropological researchers must expect 
to encounter ethical dilemmas at every stage of 
their work, and must make good-faith efforts 
to identify potential ethical claims and con­
flicts in advance when preparing proposals and 
as projects proceed. A section raising and 
responding to potential ethical issues should 
be part of every research proposal. 
2 Anthropological researchers bear 
responsibility for the integrity and reputation 
of their discipline, of scholarship, and of 
science. Thus, anthropological researchers are 
subject to the general moral rules of scientific 
and scholarly conduct: they should not deceive 
or knowingly misrepresent (i.e., fabricate 
evidence, falsify, plagiarize), or attempt to 
prevent reporting of misconduct, or obstruct 
the scientifidscholarly research of others. 
3 Anthropological researchers should do 
all they can to preserve opportunities for 
future fieldworkers to follow them to the field. 
4 Anthropological researchers should 
utilize the results of their work in an appro­
priate fashion, and whenever possible dissem­
inate their findings to the scientific and 
scholarly communi ty. 
5 Anthropological researchers should seri­
ously consider all reasonable requests for 
access to their data and other research materi­
als for purposes of research. They should also 
make every effort to insure preservation of 
their fieldwork data for use by posterity. 
C Responsibility to the public 
1 Anthropolo gical researchers should 
make the results of their research appropri­
ately available to sponsors, students, decision 

328 AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION 
makers, and other nonanthropologists. In so 
doing, they must be truthful; they are not onJy 
responsible for the factual content of their 
statements but also must consider carefully the 
social and political implications of the infor­
mation they disseminat e. They must do every­
thing in their power to insure that such 
information is well understood, properly con­
textualized, and responsibly utilized. They 
should make clear the empirical bases upon 
which their reports stand, be candid about 
their qualifications and philosophical or polit­
ical biases, and recognize and make clear the 
limits of anthropological expertise. At the 
same time, they must be alert to possible harm 
their information may cause people with 
whom they work or colleagues. 
2 Anthropolo gists may choose to move 
beyond disseminating research results to a 
position of advocacy. This is an individual 
decision, but not an ethical responsibility. 
IV Teaching 
Responsibility to students 
and trainees 
While adhering to ethical and legal codes gov­
erning relations between teachers/mentors and 
students/trainees at their educational institu­
tions or as members of wider organizations, 
anthropological teachers should be particu­
larly sensitive to the ways such codes apply 
in their discipline (for example, when teaching 
involves close contact with students/trainees 
in field situations ). Among the widely recog­
nized precepts which anthropological teachers, 
like other teachers/mentors, should follow 
are: 
1 Teachers/mentors should conduct their 
programs in ways that preclude discrimination 
on the basis of sex, marital status, ''race," 
social class, political convictions, disabilit y, 
religion, ethnic background, national origin, 
sexual orientation, age, or other criteria irrel­
evant to academic performance. 
2 Teachers'/mentors' duties include con­
tinually striving to improve their teaching / 
training techniques; being available and 
responsive to student/trainee interests; coun­
seling students/trainees realistically regarding career opportunities; conscientiously supervis­
ing, encouraging, and supporting 
students'/rrainees' studies; being fair, prompt, 
and reliable in communicating evaluations; 
assisting students/trainees in securing research 
support; and helping students/trainees when 
they seek professional placement. 
3 Teachers/mentors should impress upon 
students/trainees the ethical challenges 
involved in every phase of anthropological 
work; encourage them to reflect upon this and 
other codes; encourage dialogue with col­
leagues on ethical issues; and discourag e par­
ticipation in ethically questionable projects. 
4 Teachers/mentors should publicly 
acknowle dge student/trainee assistance in 
research and preparation of their work; give 
appropriate credit for coauthorship to stu­
dents/trainees; encourage publication of 
. worthy student/trainee papers; and compen­
sate students/tra inees justly for their participa­
tion in all professional activities. 
5 Teachers/mentors should beware of the 
exploitation and serious conflicts of interest 
which may result if they engage in sexual rela­
tions with students/trainees. They must avoid 
sexual liaisons with students/trainees for 
whose education and professional training 
they are in any way responsible. 
V Application 
1 The same ethical guidelines apply to all 
anthropological work. That is, in both propos­
ing and carrying out research, anthropolo gists 
must be open with funders, colleagues, persons 
studied or providing information, and relevant 
parties affected by the work about the 
purpose(s}, potential impacts, and source(s) of 
support for the work. Applied anthropolo gists 
must intend and expect to utilize the results of 
their work appropriately (i.e., publication, 
teaching, program and policy development) 
within a reasonable time. In situations in 
which anthropological knowledge is applied, 
anthropologists bear the same responsibility to 
be open and candid about their skills and 
intentions, and monitor the effects of their 
work on all persons affected. Anthropologists 
may be involved in many types of work, fre­
quently affecting individuals and groups with 
diverse and sometimes conflicting interests. 

CODE OF ETHICS 329 
The individual anthropolo gist must make care­
fully considered ethical choices and be pre­
pared to make clear the assumptions, facts and 
issues on which those choices are based. 
2 In aU dealings with employers, persons 
hired to pursue anthropological research or 
apply anthropological knowledge should be 
honest about their quaLifications, capabilities, 
and aims. Prior to making any professional 
commitments, they must review the purposes 
of prospective employers, taking into consid­
eration the employer's past activities and 
future goals. In working for governmental 
agencies or private businesses, they should be 
especially careful not to promise or imply 
acceptance of conditions contrary to profes­
sional ethics or competing commitments. 
3 Applied anthropo logists, as any anthro­
pologist, should be alert to the danger of 
compr6mising anthropological ethics as a 
condition for engaging in research or practice. 
They should also be alert to proper demands 
of hospitalit y, good citizenship and guest 
status. Proactive contribution and leadership 
in shaping public or private sector actions and 
policies may be as ethically justifiable as inac­
tion, detachment, or noncooperation, depend­
ing on circumstances. 
VI Epilogue 
Anthropological research, teaching, and appli­
cation, like any human actions, pose choices 
for which anthropologists individually and 
collectively bear ethical responsibility. Since 
anthropologists are members of a variety of 
groups and subject to a variety of ethical 
codes, choices must sometimes be made not 
only between the varied obligations presented 
in this code but also between those of this code 
and those incurred in other statuses or roles. 
This statement does not dictate choice or 
propose sanctions. Rather, it is designed to 
promote discussion and provide general guide­
lines for ethically responsible decisions. 
VII Acknowledgments 
This Code was drafted by the Commission to 
Review the AAA Statements on Ethics during 
the period January 1995-March 1997. The Commission members were james Peacock 
(Chair), Carolyn Fluehr-Lobban, Barbara 
Frankel, Kathleen Gibson, Janet Levy, and 
Murray Wax. In addition, the following 
individuals participat ed in the Commission 
meetings: philosopher Bernard Gert, anthro­
pologists Cathleen Crain, Shirley Fiske, David 
Freyer, Felix Moos, Yolanda Moses, and Niel 
Tashima; and members of the American Soci­
ological Association Committee on Ethics. 
Open hearings on the Code were held at the 
1995 and 1996 annual meetings of the Amer­
ican Anthropological Association. The Com­
mission solicited comments from all AAA 
Sections. The first draft of the AAA Code of 
Ethics was discussed at the May 1995 AAA 
Section Assembly meeting; the second draft 
was briefly discussed at the November 1996 
meeting of the AAA Section Assembly . 
The Final Report of the Commission was 
published in the September 1995 edition of the 
Anthropology Newsletter and on the AAA 
web site (http://www.aaanet.org). Drafts of the 
Code were published in the April 1996 and 
1996 annual meeting edition of the Anthro­
pology Newsletter and the AAA web site, 
and comments were solicited from the mem­
bership. The Commission considered all 
comments from the membership in formulat­
ing the final draft in February 1997. The 
Commission gratefully acknowle dge the use of 
some language from the codes of ethics of the 
National Association for the Practice of 
Anthropolo gy and the Society for American 
Archaeol ogy. 
VIII Other Relevant Codes 
of Ethics 
The following list of other Codes of Ethics 
may be useful to anthropological researchers, 
teachers and practitioners: 
Animal Behavior Society 
1991 Guidelines for the Use of Animals m 
Research. Animal Behavior 41: 183-6. 
American Board of Forensic Examiners 
n.d. Code of Ethical Conduct. (American 
Board of Forensic Examiners, 300 South 
Jefferson Avenue, Suite 411, Springfield, MO 
65806). 

330 AMERIC AN ANTHROPOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION 
Archaeological Institute of America 
1991 Code of Ethics. American journal of 
Archaeology 9 5:285. 
1994 Code of Professional Standards. 
(Archaeological Institute of America, 675 
Commonwealth Ave, Boston, MA 02215-
1401. Supplements and expands but does not 
replace the earlier Code of Ethics). 
National Academy of Sciences 
1995 On Being a Scientist: Responsible 
Conduct in Research. 2nd edition. Washing­
ton, DC: National Academy Press (2121 
Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 
20418). 
National Association for the Practice of 
Anthropology 
1988 Ethical Guidelines for Practitioners. 
Sigma Xi 
1992 Sigma Xi Statement on the Use of 
Animals m Research. American Scientist 
80:73-6. 
Society for American Archaeology 
1996 Principles of Archaeological Ethics. 
(Society for American Archaeol ogy, 900 
Second Street, NE, Suite 12, Washington, DC 
20002-3557). Society for Applied Anthropology 
1983 Professional and Ethical Responsi bili­
ties. (Revised 1983 ). 
Society of Professional Archaeologists 
1976 Code of Ethics, Standards of Research 
Perfonnance and Institutional Standards. 
(Society of Professional Archaeologists, PO 
Box 60911, Oklahoma City, OK 73146-
0911). 
United Nations 
1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
1983 United Nations Convention on the Elim­
ination of All Forms of Discrimination Against 
Women. 
1987 United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of the Child. 
Forthcoming United Nations Declaration on 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples. 

Part VII 
Multi-Sited Fieldwork 
Antonius C. G. M. Robben 
Long-term, face-to-face, holistic ethnographic fieldwork on an island or in a small 
commpnity has been the hallmark of anthropol ogy, the model for graduate train­
ing, and the standard by which professional careers are measured. This is not to say 
that anthropolo gists like Boas and Malinowski or Powdermaker and Mead were 
not aware that the people they studied were connected to their surrounding world 
through trade, travel, and power, but they were more interested in local than translo­
cal cultures and connections. This research focus was in part epistemological, in 
part methodological, and in part a reflection of the times. Prolonged fieldwork was 
to enhance the scientific rigor and improve the empirical basis of anthropo logy, a 
discipline that was struggling to become accepted in the academy during the early 
twentieth century. The world also looked different from today. Certainly , people did 
not live in the splendid isolation which the early ethnographies seemed to suggest 
-a view that was thoroughly debunked by Eric Wolf (1982) in his anthropological 
world history-but travel, communication, and commerce did not yet have the ver­
tiginous pace and transience of the late twentieth century which therefore became 
so conducive to multi-sited fieldwork. 
Multi-sited fieldwork is not the same as fieldwork at multiple sites. The history 
of ethnographic fieldwork contains several examples of comparative research pro­
jects, such as Margaret Mead's (1935) study in three tribal cultures, and Robert 
Redfield' s analysis (1941) of a rural-urban continuum in Mexico, but these com­
parative projects departed still from a bounded research universe, whether a region 
or a theme. Instead, translocal ethnographers go where their research takes them to 
create an emergent field and study object. The emphasis is on multiple connections 
rather than multiple sites. As George Marcus (1995:105) has stated in an insight­
ful review article: "Multi-sited research is designed around chains, paths, threads, 
conjunctions, or juxtapositions of locations in which the ethnographer establishes 
some form of literal, physical presence, with an explicit, posited logic of associa­
tion or connection among sites that in fact defines the argument of the ethnogra­
phy." Marcus identifies seven modes or practices of constructing multi-sited 
ethnographies, namely by following the paths and movements of people (e.g., 
foreign correspondents hopping from crisis to crisis), things (e.g., worldwide com­
modity flows or music styles), metaphors (e.g., the proliferation of discourse about 

332 PART VII: MULTI-SITED FIELDWORK 
the immune system from medicine to other domains), narratives (e.g., the spread­
ing of myths and stories), biographies {e.g., life histories as journeys through social 
and spatial contexts), and conflicts {e.g., the transnational wanderi ngs of refugees). 
Finally, Marcus identifies a type of multi-sited ethnography which focuses on a 
strategica lly situated (single-site) research object which unfolds an emerging world 
(e.g., the ongoing conversations about factory work among working-class boys 
at school). The three selected contributions by Edwards, Hannerz, and Zabusky 
are exemplary multi-sited ethnographies situated around conflicts, people, and 
metaphors, but we begin with an important conceptual critique of traditional single­
sited ethnographies by Gupta and Ferguson. 
In their article "Beyond 'Culture': Space, Identity, and the Politics of Difference," 
Akhil Gupta and James Ferguson (1992) criticize the common presupposition 
that space, location, culture, society, and collective identity come together within 
one circumscribed complex, and that cultural difference implies the existence of 
identifiable boundaries, breaks, divisions, and discontinuities (see also Gupta and 
Ferguson 1997). This basic assumption raises questions about cultural differentia­
tion within such allegedly bounded complexes, about the hybrid cultures of post­
colonial societies, about the identity of groups of people (refugees, migrant workers, 
businessmen) who frequently cross borders, and about sociocultural change, power 
relations, and the construction of difference in border zones. These issues have 
become particularly pertinent since the acceleration of globalization processes after 
the 1989 fall of the Berlin Wall, which ended the Warsaw Pact and ushered in the 
disintegration of the Soviet Union. Today, people, products, and information cross 
borders unimpeded, under the approving eye of world powers, and even the unde­
tected movement of the illicit (refugees, drugs, laundered money, and classified infor­
mation) erases borders and erodes sociospatial territories. How are such 
communication networks deterritorializing the world, and what are the implications 
for traditional ethnographic interests ranging from tribal societies to inner-city 
barrios? If borderlands do not only exist at the perimeter of states but are wreathed 
through and across countries, then who are its inhabitants, how do they give content 
and form to their hybridized identities, and what distinguishes them, if at all, from 
the rest of society? 
Gupta and Ferguson advocate a fundamental rethinking of the spatialization of 
culture through the notion of cultural difference. Cultural difference presupposes a 
dichotomy between "us" and "them'' which quickly evolves into "here" and 
"there," even when our sympathies lie with "the Other" living "elsewher e., Instead, 
anthropologists should examine the processes that produce such differentiations in 
the first place, and be sensitive to the many interconnections, bridges, crossings, and 
shared spaces and histories that effectively undermine these dichotomies. In fact, so 
argue Gupta and Ferguson, borderlands are more representative of the globalized 
post-Cold War reality than stable, bounded states and communit ies. In many ways, 
we are all transworld transients without the stable identities we imagine we possess 
(see also Lovell 1998). We participate in assembla ges of Venn diagrams, scapes, or 
multiple grids that intersect at unexpected locations, with unexpected persons, and 
in unanticipated power fields. The challenge to ethnographic fieldwork is, then, how 
to account adequately for the numerous interconnections that fan out across the 
world from hitherto more easily bounded research sites. Multi-sited ethnography is 
presented as the answer. 

INTRODUC TION 333 
David B. Edwards (1994), in his article "Afghanistan, Ethnography , and the New 
World Order," reveals the haphazard ways in which such multi-locale ethnographies 
become constituted. Anthropolo gists have always used a networking method in 
fieldwork in complex societies. This approach forced Edwards to follow his research 
participan ts around the world and into the virtual spaces of the internet. During 
the 1980s, he had set out to study an isolated mountain village, as so many anthro­
pologists had done for decades all over the world, but he and the community 
in south-central Afghanistan became wrapped up in the liberation war of the 
mujahidin guerrilla forces against Afghanistan's communist government, the Afghan 
army, and Soviet troops. Edwards' emotional and professional involvement with the 
mountain villagers took him to locations in Afghanistan where the mujahidin were 
fighting, to the city of Peshawar and several refugee camps in Pakistan, to a het­
erogeneous group of refugees in Washington, DC, and into two Afghan internet 
news groups. 
Edwards grapples with the question of how to construct an ethnographic narra­
tive that reflects the translocal qualities and reciprocal influences of these diverse 
field sites, and how to do justice to their intuitive connections and his in situ expe­
riences. He is not looking for some overarching analytical structure or master nar­
rative, even though that is generally regarded as what distinguishes anthropolo gy 
from journalism, but he tries to find a style of ethnographic writing more congenial 
to his diverse research sites. The anonymous Afghan who posts a message on an 
electronic bulletin board seems to contrast sharply with the guerrilla commander 
visiting Washington, but are they really so different? Does Edwards know more 
about this mujahid than about the person who writes from a university-based email 
address in Europe? They are both political players out of place acting in foreign set­
tings, yet connected and motivated by a deep attachment to Afghanistan. Edwards 
hopes to retain some of the vicissitudes and happenstance of today's globalized 
reality by juxtaposing his heterogeneous fieldwork experiences rather randomly . His 
ethnography would have been different if he had been to other sites and encoun­
tered other players, but he still remains convinced that this and other translocal ren­
ditions would capture similar connections, connections unseen in single-sited 
fieldwork. 
Ulf Hannerz (2003 ), in his article "Being There ... and There ... and There! 
Reflections on Multi-Site Ethnography," illustrates the differences between single­
sited and multi-sited fieldwork through his research on foreign correspondents, both 
the familiar faces on the evening news reporting from their permanent station in 
Moscow, Jerusalem, or Paris and those roving reporters who show up near a natural 
disaster and reappear only days later at the edge of a mass grave or makeshift refugee 
camp (see also Hannerz 2004). After carrying out some preliminary research in New 
York, Hannerz decides upon Tokyo, Jerusalem, and Johannesburg as his principal 
sites while realizing that he could have equally well chosen other places. Hannerz 
points out that this research perspective would better be labeled translocal than 
multi-sited because it is not the different localities themselves but their intercon­
nections that ma tter the most. 
Hannerz focuses on the national and international networks of foreign corre­
spondents with local troublesho oters, who arrange cars, food, shelter, cameramen, 
and willing interviewees, and with translocal editors, bureau chiefs, and fellow­
correspondents whom they meet at airports, offices, and television studios. He 

334 PART VII: MULTI-SITED FIELDWORK 
also pays attention to the collaboration between news agencies, and studies the 
career paths of reporters. Social networks and life histories are tried research instru­
ments that continue to be important for multi-sited fieldwork but it relies much less 
on face-to-face contacts, while the involvement in activity fields and social domains 
is much more diffuse than in single-sited research. Arjun Appadurai (1996) has used 
the term "scapes" to describe unique spheres of circulation (such as financescapes, 
mediascapes, and ethnoscapes) that in today's world resemble a collection of Venn 
diagrams. It is typical of such translocal scapes that the community of foreign cor­
respondents cannot be grasped ethnogra phically and holisticaUy as is common in 
single-sited fieldwork. Fleeting relations, short research periods, and a patchwork 
of field sites yield different outcomes in different configurations. This partiality is 
less worrisome than it seems, so argues Hannerz, because the constant flux of 
people, things, and ideas in our globalized world does by itself give rise to con­
stantly changing hybrid realities instead of the apparent regularities and structures 
of more stable societies examined by the earliest generations of anthropologists. 
The research topics of multi-sited ethnographers are not bound to particular 
places, seasons, or people, and cannot rely on research participants immersed in 
closed communities. Interviews, impressionistic observations, text analysis, the 
internet, photography , and video are therefore far more important research tools 
than participant observation, ritual initiation, and apprenticeship. Hannerz's con­
clusion that "ethnography is an art of the possible" (2003:213) is as much true for 
single-sited, traditional fieldwork as for multi-sited research, but with the difference 
that translocal research topics are harder to pin down because of a greater varia­
tion in methods, informants, and locations. 
Stacia E. Zabusky (2002; see also 1995) does not identify her ethnographic field 
in the interconnections of multiple spatial sites, such as towns, offices, and airports. 
Instead, she encounters perpetually moving flows of knowledge, communication, 
decisions, and power (which she calls widening gyres) that dissolve and displace 
unstable centers at one time, transform peripheries into shifting centers at another , 
and reassemble them elsewhere without any central authority controlling these 
centers and peripheries. Her article "Ethnography in/of Transnational Processes: 
Following Gyres in the Worlds of Big Science and European Integration" evolves 
around the metaphor of European integration and describes her journey in search 
of the most appropriate ethnographic perspective on the transnational relations 
between the European Union and space science. 
Zabusky decided to situate herself at the Space Science Department of the 
European Space Research and Technology Center (ESTEC) in the Netherlands. She 
attends meetings, observes equipment tests, listens to scientific discussions, com­
mutes from a nearby village to the gated scientific center, and reluctantly joins in 
social activities. She discovers that this site is just one of many ever-shifting loca­
tions in a dynamic web of emails, faxes, technical designs, budgets, board meetings, 
impromptu foreign travel, policy decisions, alliances, allegiances, and industrial 
interests. She cannot concentrate her research on people, places, organizations, or 
social fields because neither power and authority nor the flows and connections are 
vested in any one of them in particular . Europe and the transnational scientific com­
munity are elusive study objects. Zabusky therefore takes the space-science mission 
as her ethnographic focus to conduct on-the-ground, experience-near fieldwork. 

INTRODUCTION 335 
Space missions are financed by the European Union member states, designed by sci­
entists, run by engineers, and produced by national industries, yet the decision­
making processes and information flows are not as clear-cut as they seem. There 
are many dispersed centrifugal forces at work (new scientific developments, tech­
nological innovations, changing national and European political agendas, ongoing 
budgetary disputes) that lead to considerable instabilit y, uncertain ty, and improvi­
sation to make the mission a success. The space mission is like the Kula ring 
exchange in Melanesia, in the sense that neither the Trobrianders nor the European 
space scientists have a complete picture and understanding of the translocal under­
takings in which they are involved. The major difference for the ethnographer of 
the two research objects is that Malinowski (see Chapter 3) did, while Zabusky did 
not, have a bird's-eye view of the whole process. Zabusky felt just as trapped among 
the uncontrollable forces and gyres of this amorphous whole as the scientists and 
engineers who were pursuing a concrete mission of space exploration. 
Multi-sited fieldwork is still in its infancy but it exerts great ethnographic appeal 
and opens up new areas of anthropological knowledge. The possibilities are infinite 
as ethnographers are not bound to one particular location, communit y, or social 
group., The attraction of multi-sited fieldwork is that ethnographers are no longer 
obliged to spend one continuous year at a research site but may combine week-or 
month-long visits to particular locations with telephone conversations, observations 
in public spaces, a thorough search of internet sites and news groups, joint trips 
with research participants, and so on. The fear of a loss of standard, that anything 
· goes once Malinowski's canon of a four-season fieldwork period in one place is 
abandoned, seems unwarranted as the research methodol ogy becomes increasingly 
sophisticated, the peer-review process continues unabated, and growing numbers of 
ethnographers study comparable themes and subjects. 

