24 
Beyond ··culture": 
Space, Identity, and the 
Politics of Difference 
Akhil Gupta and James Ferguson 
For a subject whose central rite of passage is 
fieldwork, whose romance has rested on its 
exploration of the remote ("the most other of 
others" [Hannerz 1986:363]), whose critical 
function is seen to lie in its juxtaposition of rad­
ically different ways of being (located "else­
where") with that of the anthropologists' own, 
usually Western, culture, there has been surpris­
ingly Little self-consciousness about the issue of 
space in anthropological theory. (Some notable 
exceptions are Appadurai 1986, 1988], 
Hannerz [1987], and Rosaldo [1988, 1989].) 
This collection of five ethnographic articles rep­
resents a modest attempt to deal with the issues 
of space and place, along with some necessarily 
related concerns such as those of location, dis­
placement, communi ty, and identity. In particu­
lar, we wish to explore how the renewed interest 
in theorizing space in postmodernist and femi­
nist theory (Anzaldua 1987; Baudrillard 1988; 
Deleuze and Guattari 1987; Foucault 1982; 
Jameson 1984; Kaplan 1987; Martin and 
Mohanty 1986) -embodied in such notions as 
surveillance, panopticism, simulacra, deterrito­
rialization, postmodern hyperspace, border­
lands, and marginality -forces us to reevaluate 
such central analytic concepts in anthropology 
as that of "culture" and, by extension, the idea 
of "cultural difference." Representations of space in the social sci­
ences are remarkably dependent on images of 
break, rupture, and disjunction. The distinc­
tiveness of societies, nations, and cultures is 
based upon a seemingly unproblematic divi­
sion of space, on the fact that they occupy 
"naturally" discontinuous spaces. The premise 
of discontinuity forms the starting point from 
wh1ch w theorize contact, conflict, and con­
tradiction between cultures and societies. For 
example, the representation of the world as a 
collection of "countries,'' as in most world 
maps, sees it as an inherently fragmented 
space, divided by different colors into diverse 
national societies, each "rooted" in its proper 
place (cf. Malkki 1992). It is so taken for 
granted that each country embodies its own 
distinctive culture and society that the terms 
"society" and "culture" are routinely simply 
appended to the names of nation- states, as 
when a tourist visits India to understand 
"Indian culture" and "Indian society," or 
Thailand to experience "Thai culture," or the 
United States ro get a whiff of "American 
culture. ' 
Of course, the geographical territories that 
cultures and societies are believed to map onto 
do not have to be nations. We do, for example, 
have ideas about culture-areas that overlap 
Akhil Gupta and James Ferguson, "Beyond 'Culture': Space, Identit y, and rhe Politics of Difference, .. pp. 6-23 
from Cultural Anthropol ogy 7:1 (Feb., 1992). Copyright © 1992 by the American Anthropo logtcal 
Association. 

338 AKHIL GUPTA AND JAMES FERGUSON 
several nation-states, or of multicultural na­
tions. On a smaller scale, perhaps, are our dis­
ciplinary assumptions about the association of 
culturally unitary groups (tribes or peoples) 
with "their" territories: thus, "the Nuer" live 
in "Nuerland" and so forth. The clearest 
illustration of this kind of thinking are the 
classic "ethnographic maps" that purported to 
display the spatial distribution of peoples, 
tribes, and cultures. But in all these cases, 
space itself becomes a kind of neutral grid on 
which cultural difference, historical memory, 
and societal organization are inscribed. It is in 
this way that space functions as a central orga­
nizing principle in the social sciences at the 
same rime that it disappears from analytical 
purv1ew . 
This assumed isomorphism of space, place, 
and culture results in some significant prob­
lems. First, there is the issue of those who 
inhabit the border, that "'narrow strip along 
steep edges" (Anzaldua 1987:3) of national 
boundaries. The fiction of cultures as discrete, 
object-like phenomena occupying discrete 
spaces becomes implausible for those who 
inhabit the borderlands. Related to border 
inhabitants are those who live a life of border 
crossings -migrant workers, nomads, and 
members of the transnational business and 
professional elite. What is "the culture" of 
farm workers who spend half a year in Mexico 
and half a year in the United States? Finally, 
there are those who cross borders more or less 
permanently -immigrants, refugees, exiles, 
and expatriates. In their case, the disjuncture 
of place and culture is especially clear: Khmer 
refugees in the United States take "Khmer 
culture.. with them in the same complicat ed 
way that Indian immigrants in England trans­
port "'Indian culture" to their new homeland. 
A second set of problems raised by the 
implicit mapping of cultures onto places is 
to account for cultural differences within a 
locality. "Multicultur alism" is both a feeble 
acknowledgment of the fact that cultures have 
lost their moorings in definite places and an 
attempt to subsume this plurality of cultures 
within the framework of a national identity. 
Similarly, the idea of .. subcultures" attempts to 
preserve the idea of distinct "cultures" while 
acknowledging the relation of different cul­
tures to a dominant culture within the same geographical and territorial space. Conven­
tional accounts of ethnicity, even when used to 
describe cultural differences in settings where 
people from different regions live side by side, 
rely on an unproblematic link between iden­
tity and place. 1 Although such concepts are 
suggestive because they endeavor to stretch 
the naturalized association of culture with 
place, they faiJ to interrogate this assumption 
in a truly fundamental manner. We need to ask 
how to deal with cultural difference while 
abandoning received ideas of (localized) 
culture. 
Third, there is the important question of 
postcolonialit y. To which places do the hybrid 
cultures of postcoloniality belong? Does the 
colonial encounter create a "new culture" in 
both the colonized and colonizing country, or 
does it destabilize the notion that nations and 
cultures are isomorphic? As discussed below, 
postcoloniality further problema tizes the rela­
tionship between space and culture. 
Last, and most important, challenging the 
ruptured landscape of independent nations 
and autonomous cultures raises the question 
of understanding social change and cultural 
transformation as situated within intercon­
nected spaces. The presumption that spaces are 
autonomous has enabled the power of topog­
raphy to conceal successfu lly the topography 
of power. The inherently fragmented space 
assumed in the definition of anthropology as 
the study of cultures (in the plural) may have 
been one of the reasons behind the long­
standing failure to write anthropol ogy's 
history as the biography of imperialism. For if 
one begins with the premise that spaces have 
always been hierarchically interconnected, 
instead of naturally disconnected, then cultural 
and social change becomes not a matter of 
cultural contact and articulation but one of 
rethinking difference through connection. 
To illustrate, let us examine one powerful 
model of cultural change that attempts to 
relate dialectically the local to larger spatial 
arenas: articulation. Articulation models, 
whether they come from Marxist structuralism 
or from "moral economy," posit a primeval 
state of autonomy (usually labeled "precapi­
talist" ), which is then violated by global capi­
talism. The result is that both local and larger 
spatial arenas are transformed, the local more 

SPACE, IDENTITY, AND THE POLITICS OF DIFFERENCE 339 
than the global to be sure, bur not necessarily 
in a predetermined direction. This notion of 
articulation allows one to explore the richly 
unintended consequences of, say, colonial cap­
italism, where loss occurs alongside invention. 
Yet, by taking a preexisting, localized "com­
munity" as a given starting point, it fails to 
examine sufficiently the processes (such as the 
structures of feeling that pervade the imagin­
ing of community) that go into the construc­
tion of space as place or locality in the first 
instance. In other words, instead of assuming 
the autonomy of the primeval communit y, we 
need to examine how it was formed as a com­
munity out of the interconnected space that 
always already existed. Colonialism, then, rep­
resents the displacement of one form of inter­
connection by another. This is not to deny that 
colonialism, or an expanding capitalism, does 
indeed' have profoundly dislocating effects on 
existing societies. But by always foregrounding 
the spatial distribution of hierarchical power 
relations, we can better understand the process 
whereby a space achieves a distinctive identity 
as a place. Keeping in mind that notions of 
locality or commun ity refer both ro a demar­
cated physical space and to clusters of interac­
tion, we can see that the identity of a place 
emerges by the intersection of its specific 
involvement in a system of hierarchically orga­
nized spaces with its cultural construction as a 
community or locality. 
It is for this reason that what Jameson 
(1984) has dubbed "postmodern hyperspace" 
has so fundamentally chal lenged the conve­
nient fiction that mapped cultures onto 
places and peoples. In the capitalist West, a 
Fordist regime of accumulation, emphasizing 
extremely large production facilities, a rela­
tively stable work force, and the welfare state, 
combined to create urban "communities, 
whose outlines were most clearly visible in 
company towns (Davis 1984; Harvey 1989; 
Mandel 1975). The counterpart of this in the 
international arena was that multinational cor­
porations, under the leadership of the United 
States, steadily exploited the raw materials, 
primary goods, and cheap labor of the inde­
pendent nation-states of the postcolonial 
... Third World." Multilateral agencies and 
powerful Western states preached, and where 
necessary militarily enforced, the "laws" of the market to encourage the international flow of 
capital, while national immigration policies 
ensured that there would be no free (i.e., anar­
chic, disruptive) flow of labor to the high-wage 
islands in the capitalist core. Fordist patterns 
of accumulation have now been replaced by a 
regime of flexible accumulation -character­
ized by small-batch production, rapid shifts in 
product lines, extremely fast movements of 
capital to exploit the smal lest differentials in 
labor and raw material costs-built on a more 
sophisticated communications and informa­
tion network and better means of transporting 
goods and people. At the same time, the indus­
trial production of culture, entertainment, and 
leisure that first achieved something approach­
ing global distribution during the Fordist era 
led, paradoxica lly, to the invention of new 
forms of cultural difference and new forms 
of imagining commun ity. Something like a 
transnational public sphere has certainly ren­
dered any strictly bounded sense of community 
or locality obsolete. At the same time, it has 
enabled the creation of forms of solidarity and 
identity that do not rest on an appropriation 
of space where contiguity and face-to-face 
contact are paramount. In the pulverized space 
of postmodernit y, space has not become irrel­
evant: it has been reterritorialized in a way that 
does not conform to the experience of space 
that characterized the era of high modernit y. It 
is this that forces us to reconceptu alize funda­
mentally the politics of communit y, solidarity, 
identity, and cultural difference. 
Imagined Communities. 
Imagined Places 
People have undoubtedly always been more 
mobile and identities less fixed than the static 
and typologizing approaches of classical 
anthropology would suggest. Bur today, the 
rapidly expanding and quickening mobility of 
people combines with the refusal of cultural 
products and practices to "stay put" to give a 
profound sense of a loss of territorial roots, of 
an erosion of the cultural distinctiveness of 
places, and of ferment in anthropological 
theory. The apparent deterritorialization of 
identity that accompanies such processes has 
made Clifford's question (1988:275) a key one 

340 AKHIL GUPTA AND JAMES FERGUSON 
for recent anthropological inquiry: "What 
does it mean, at the end of the twentieth 
century, to speak ... of a 'native land'? What 
processes rather than essences are involved in 
present experiences of cultural identity?" 
Such questions are of course not wholly new, 
but issues of collective identity today do seem 
to take on a special character, when more and 
more of us live in what Said ( 1979:18) has 
called "a generalized condition of homeless­
ness," a world where identities are increasingly 
coming to be, if not wholly deterritorialized, 
at least differently territorialized. Refugees, 
migrants, displaced and stateless peoples -
these are perhaps the first to live out these real­
ities in their most complete form, but the 
problem is more general. In a world of dias­
pora, transnational culture flows, and mass 
movements of populations, old-fashion ed 
attempts to map the globe as a set of culture 
regions or homelands are bewildered by a daz: 
zling array of postcolonial simulacra, dou� 
blings and redoublings, as India and Pakistan 
apparently reappear in postcolonial simulation 
in London, prerevolurion Tehran rises from the 
ashes in Los Angeles, and a thousand similar 
cultural dreams are played out in urban and 
rural settings all across the globe. In this 
culture-play of diaspora, familiar lines between 
"here" and "there, n center and periphery, 
colony and metropole become blurred. 
Where "here" and "there" become blurred 
in this way, the cultural certainties and fixities 
of the metropole are upset as surely, if not in 
the same way, as those of the colonized periph­
ery. In this sense, it is not only the displaced 
who experience a displacement (cf. Bhabha 
1989:66). For even people remaining in famil­
iar and ancestral places find the nature of their 
relation to place ineluctably changed, and the 
illusion of a natural and essential connection 
between the place and the culture broken. 
"EngHshness," for instance, in contempora ry, 
internationaliz ed England is just as compli­
cated and nearly as deterritori alized a notion 
as Palestinian-ness or Armenian-ness, since 
"England" ("the real England") refers less to 
a bounded place than to an imagined state of 
being or moral location. Consider, for 
instance, the following quote from a young 
white reggae fan in the ethnically chaotic 
neighborhood of Balsa II Heath in Birmingham: there's no such thing as "England" any 
more ... welcome to India brothers ! This is 
the Caribbean! ... Nigeria! ... There is no 
England, man. This is what is coming. Balsall 
Heath is the center of the melting pot, 'cos all 
I ever see when I go out is half-Arab, half­
Pakistani, half-Jamaican, half-Scottish, half­
Irish. I know 'cos I am [half Scottish/half Irish] 
... who am I? ... Tell me who I belong to? 
They criticize me, the good old England. 
Alright, where do I belong? You know, I was 
brought up with blacks, Pakistanis, Africans, 
Asians, everything, you name it ... who do I 
belong to? ... I'm just a broad person. The 
earth is mine ... you know we was not born 
in Jamaica ... we was not born in "England." 
We were born here, man. It's our right. That's 
the way I see it. That's the way I deal with it. 
[Hebdige 1987:158-9] 
The broad-minded acceptance of cos­
mopolitanism that seems to be implied here is 
perhaps more the exception than the rule, but 
there can be little doubt that the explosion of 
a culturally stable and unitary "England" into 
the cut-and-mix "here" of contemporary 
Balsall Heath is an example of a phenomenon 
that is real and spreading. It is clear that the 
erosion of such supposedly natural connec­
tions between peoples and places has not led 
to the modernist specter of global cultural 
homogenization (Clifford 1988). But "cul­
tures" and "peoples," however persistent they 
may be, cease to be plausibly identifiable as 
spots on the map. 
The irony of these times, however, is that as 
actual places and localities become ever more 
blurred and indeterminat e, ideas of culturally 
and ethnically distinct places become perhaps 
even more salient. It is here that it becomes 
most visible how imagined commun ities 
(Anderson 1983) come to be attached to imag­
ined places, as displaced peoples cluster 
around remembered or imagined homelands, 
places, or communities in a world that seems 
increasingly to deny such firm territorial ized 
anchors in their actuality. The set of issues 
surrounding the construction of place and 
homeland by mobile and displaced people is 
addressed in different ways by a number of the 
articles in this issue. 
Remembered places have often served as 
symbolic anchors of community for dispersed 

SPACE, IDENTITY, AND THE POLITICS OF DIFFERENCE 341 
people. This has long been true of immigrants, 
who (as Leonard [1992] shows vividly) use 
memory of place to construct imaginatively 
their new lived world. "Homeland" in this 
way remains one of the most powerful unify­
ing symbols for mobile and displaced peoples, 
though the relation to homeland may be very 
differently constructed in different settings (see 
Malkki 1992). Moreover , even in more com­
pletely deterritorialized times and settings -
settings where "home" is not only distant, but 
also where the very notion of "home" as a 
durably fixed place is in doubt-aspects of our 
lives remain highly "localized" in a social 
sense, as Peters (1992) argues. We need to give 
up naive ideas of communities as literal enti­
ties (cf. Cohen 1985), but remain sensitive to 
the profound "bifocality" that characterizes 
locally lived lives in a globally interconnected 
world, 'and the powerful role of place in the 
"near view" of lived experience (Peters 1992). 
The partial erosion of spatially bounded 
social worlds and the growing role of the imag­
ination of places from a distance, how­
ever, themselves must be situated within the 
highly spatialized terms of a global capitalist 
economy. The special challenge here is to use 
a focus on the way space is imagined (but not 
imaginary!) as a way to explore the processes 
through which such conceptual processes of 
place making meet the changing global eco­
nomic and political conditions of lived spaces 
-the relation, we could say, between place and 
space. As Ferguson (this issue) shows, impor­
tant tensions may arise when places that have 
been imagined at a distance must become lived 
spaces. For places are always imagined in the 
context of political-economic determinations 
that have a logic of their own. Territoriality is 
thus reinscribed at just the point it threatens 
to be erased. 
The idea that space is made meaningful is 
of course a familiar one to anthropo logists; 
indeed, there is hardly an older or better esta b­
lished anthropological truth. East or West, 
inside or outside, left or right, mound or flood­
plain -from at least the time of Durkheim, 
anthropology has known that the experience 
of space is always socially constructed. The 
more urgent task, taken up by several articles 
in this issue, is to politicize this uncontest­
able observation. With meaning making understood as a practice, how are spatial 
meanings established? Who has the power to 
make places of spaces? Who contests this? 
What is at stake? 
Such questions are particularly important 
where the meaningful association of places and 
peoples is concerned. As Malkki (1992) 
shows, two naturalisms must be challenged 
here. First is what we will call the ethnologi­
cal habit of taking the association of a cultur­
ally unitary group (the "tribe" or "people") 
and "its" territory as natural, which is dis­
cussed in the previous section. A second, and 
closely related, naturalism is what we will call 
the national habit of taking the association of 
citizens of states and their territories as 
natural. Here the exemplary image is of the 
conventional world map of nation-states, 
through which school-children are taught such 
deceptively simple-sounding beliefs as that 
France is where the French live, America is 
where the Americans live, and so on. Even a 
casual observer , of course, knows that not only 
Americans live in America, and it is dear that 
the very question of what is a "real American., 
is largely up for grabs. But even anthropolo­
gists still talk of "American culture" with no 
clear understanding of what that means, 
because we assume a natural association of 
a culture ("American culture"), a people 
(11America ns"), and a place (''the United States 
of America "). Both the ethnological and the 
national naturalisms present associations of 
people and place as solid, commonsensical, 
and agreed-upon, when they are in fact con­
rested, uncertain, and in flux. 
Much recenr work in anthropology and 
related fields has focused on the process 
through which such reified and naturalized 
national representations are constructed and 
maintained by states and national elites. (See, 
for instance, Anderson 1983; Handler 1988; 
Herzfeld 1987; Hobsbawm and Ranger 1983; 
Kapferer 1988; Wright 1985.} Borneman 
(1992) presenrs a case where state construc­
tions of national territory are complicated 
by a very particular sort of displacement, as 
the territorial division and reformation of 
Germany following the Second World War 
made unavailable to the two states the claims 
to a territori ally circumscribed home and cul­
turally delineated nation that are usually so 

342 AKHIL GUPTA AND JAMES FERGUSON 
central to establish legitimacy. Neither could 
their citizens rely on such appeals in con­
structing their own identities. In forging 
national identities estranged in this way from 
both territory and culture, Borneman argues, 
the postwar German states and their citizens 
employed oppositional strategies, ultimately 
resulting in versions of the displaced and 
decentered identities that mark what is often 
called the postmodern condition. 
Discussions of nationalism make it clear that 
states play a crucial role in the popular poli­
tics of place making and in the creation of nat­
uralized links between places and peoples. But 
it is important to note that state ideologies are 
far from being the only point at which the 
imagination of place is politicized. Opposi­
tional images of place have of course been 
extremely important in anticolonial national­
ist movements, as well as in campaigns for self­
determination and sovereignty on the part of 
ethnic counter-nations such as the Hutu 
(Malkki 1992), the Eritreans, and the Armeni­
ans. Bisharat (1992) traces some of the ways 
in which the imagining of place has played into 
the Palestinian struggle, showing both how 
specific constructions of "homeland'' have 
changed in response to political circumst ances 
and how a deeply felt relation to "the land" 
continues to inform and inspire the Palestinian 
struggle for self-dete rmination. Bisharat's 
article serves as a useful reminder, in the light 
of national ism's often reactionary connota­
tions in the Western world, of how often 
notions of home and "own place" have been 
empowering in anticolonial contexts. 
Indeed, future observers of 20th-century 
revolutions will probably be struck by the dif­
ficulty of formulating large-scale political 
movements without reference to national 
homelands. Gupta ( 1992) discusses the diffi­
culties raised in attempting to rally people 
around such a nonnational collectivity as the 
nonaligned movement; and he points out that 
similar problems are raised by the proletarian 
internationalist movement, since, "as genera­
tions of Marxists after Marx found out, it is 
one thing to liberate a nation, quite another to 
liberate the workers of the world" (Gupta 
1992). Class-based international ism's tenden­
cies to nationalism (as in the history of the 
Second International, or that of the USSR), and to utopianism imagined in local rather 
than universal terms (as in Morris' s News from 
Nowhere [1970], where "nowhere" [utopia] 
turns out to be a specifically English "some­
where"), show clearly the importance of 
attaching causes to places and the ubiquity 
of place making in collective political 
mobilization. 
Such place making, however, need not be 
national in scale. One example of this is the 
way idealized notions of "the country" have 
been used in urban settings to construct cri­
tiques of industrial capitalism (cf. in Britain, 
Williams 1973; for Zambia, Ferguson 1992). 
Another case is the reworking of ideas of 
"home" and "community" by feminists like 
Martin and Mohanty (1986) and Kaplan 
(1987). Rofel (1992) gives another example in 
her treatment of the contested meanings of the 
spaces and local history of a Chinese factory. 
Her analysis shows both how specific factory 
locations acquired meanings over time and 
how these localized spatial meanings con­
founded the modernizing, panoptic designs of 
planners -indeed, how the durability of 
memory and localized meanings of sites and 
bodies calls into question the very idea of a 
universal, undifferentiated "modernity." 
It must be noted that such popular politics 
of place can as easily be conservative as pro­
gressive. Often enough, as in the contemporary 
United States, the association of place with 
memory , loss, and nostalgia plays directly into 
the hands of reactionary popular movements. 
This is true not only of explicitly national 
images long associated with the Right, but also 
of imagined locales and nostalgic settings such 
as "small-town America" or "the frontier," 
which often play into and complement 
antifeminist idealizations of "the home" and 
"family. ''2 
Space, Politics, and 
Anthropological 
Representation 
Changing our conceptions of the relation 
between space and cultural difference offers a 
new perspective on recent debates surrounding 
issues of anthropolo gical representation and 
writing. The new attention to representational 

SPACE, IDENTITY, AND THE POLITICS OF DIFFERENCE 343 
practices has already led to more sophisticated 
understandings of processes of objectification 
and the construction of other-ness in anthro­
pological writing. However , with this said, it 
also seems to us that recent notions of "cultural 
critique" (Marcus and Fischer 1986) depend 
on a spatialized understanding of cultural dif­
ference that needs to be problematized. 
The foundation of cultural critique - a dia­
logic relation with an "other" culture that 
yields a critical viewpoint on "our own 
culture" -assumes an already-existing world 
of many different, distinct "cultures," and an 
unproblematic distinction between "our own 
society" and an "other" society. As Marcus 
and Fischer put it, the purpose of cultural cri­
tique is "to generate critical questions from 
one society to probe the other" ( 1986: 117); 
the goal is "to apply both the substantive 
results' and the epistemological lessons learned 
from ethnography abroad to a renewal of the 
critical function of anthropology as it is 
pursued in ethnographic projects at home" 
(1986:112). 
Marcus and Fischer are sensitive to the fact 
that cultural difference is present "here at 
home," too, and that "the other" need not be 
exotic or far away to be other. But the funda­
mental conception of cultural critique as a 
relation between "different societies" ends up, 
perhaps against the authors' intentions, spa­
tializing cultural difference in familiar ways, 
as ethnography becomes, as above, a link 
between an unproblematiz ed "home" and 
"abroad." The anthropological relation is not 
simply with people who are different, but with 
"a different society," "a different culture," and 
thus, inevitably , a relation between "here" and 
"there." In all of this, the terms of the oppo­
sition ("here" and "there," "us" and "them," 
"our own" and "other" societies) are taken as 
received: the problem for anthropologists is to 
use our encounter with "them," "there," to 
construct a critique of "our own society," 
"here." 
There are a number of problems with this 
way of conceptua lizing the anthropological 
project. Perhaps the most obvious is the ques­
tion of the identity of the "we" that keeps 
coming up in phrases such as "ourselves" and 
"our own society." Who is this "we"? If the 
answer is, as we fear, "the West," then we must ask precisely who is to be included and 
excluded from this club. Nor is the problem 
solved simply by substituting for "our own 
society," "the ethnographer' s own society." 
For ethnographers, as for other natives, the 
postcolonial world is an interconnected social 
space; for many anthropologists-and perhaps 
especially for displaced Third World scholars 
-the identity of "one's own society" is an open 
question. 
A second problem with the way cultural 
difference has been conceptualized within 
the "cultural critique" project is that, once 
excluded from that privileged domain "our 
own society," "the other" is subtly nativized -
placed in a separate frame of analysis and 
"spatially incarcerated" (Appadurai 1988) in 
that "other place" that is proper to an "other 
culture." Cultural critique assumes an original 
separation, bridged at the initiation of the 
anthropological fieldworker . The problematic 
is one of "contact": communication not within 
a shared social and economic world, but 
"across cultures'' and "between societies . ., 
As an alternative to this way of thinking 
about cultural difference, we want to prob­
lematize the unity of the "us" and the other­
ness of the "other," and question the radical 
separation between the two that makes the 
opposition possible in the first place. We are 
interested less in establishing a dialogic rela­
tion between geographically distinct societies 
than in exploring the processes of production 
of difference in a world of culturally, socially, 
and economically interconnected and interde­
pendent spaces. 
[ ... ] 
What is needed, then, is more than a ready 
ear and a deft editorial hand to capture and 
orchestrate the voices of "others"; what is 
needed is a willingness to interrogate, politi­
cally and historically , the apparent "given" of 
a world in the first place divided into "our­
selves'' and "others." A first step on this road 
is to move beyond naturalized conceptions of 
spatializ ed "cultures" and to explore instead 
the production of difference within common, 
shared, and connected spaces-"the San," for 
instance, not as "a people," "native" to the 
desert, but as a historically constituted and de­
propertied category systematically relegated to 
the desert. 

344 AKHIL GUPTA AND JAMES FERGUSON 
The move we are calling for, most generally , 
is away from seeing cultural difference as the 
correlate of a world of "peoples"' whose sepa­
rate histories wait to be bridged by the anthro­
pologist and toward seeing it as a product of 
a shared historical process that differentiates 
the world as it connects it. For the proponents 
of "cultural critique," difference is taken as 
starting point, not as end product. Given a 
world of "different societies," they ask, how 
can we use experience in one to comment on 
another? But if we question a pre-given world 
of separate and discrete "peoples and cul­
tures," and see instead a difference-producing 
set of relations, we turn from a project of ju.x­
taposing preexisting differences to one of 
e:\.l'loring the construction of differences in 
historical process. 
In this perspective, power does not enter the 
anthropological picture only at the moment of 
representation, for the cultural distinctiveness 
that the anthropologist attempts to represent 
has always already been produced within a 
field of power relations. There is thus a poli­
tics of otherness that is not reducible to a pol­
itics of representation. Te:x.wal strategies can 
call attention to the politics of representation, 
but the issue of otherness itself is not really 
addressed by the devices of polyphonic textual 
construction or collaboration with infor­
mant-writers, as writer s like Clifford and 
Crapanzano sometimes seem to suggest. 
In addition to (not instead of!) textual 
experimentation, then, there is a need to 
address the issue of "the West" and its 
.. others" in a way that acknowledges the 
extra-textual roots of the problem. For 
example, the area of immigration and immi­
gration law is one practical area where the pol­
itics of space and the politics of otherness link 
up very directly. Indeed, if the separateness of 
separate places is not a natural given but an 
anthropological problem, it is remarkable how 
little anthrop ologists have had to say about the 
contemporary political issues connected with 
immigration in the United States. 3 If we accept 
a world of originally separate and culturally 
distinct places, then the question of immigra­
tion policy is just a question of how hard we 
should try to maintain this original order. In 
this perspective, immigration prohibitions are 
a relatively minor matter. Indeed, operating with a spatially naturalized understanding of 
cultural difference, uncontrolled immigration 
may even appear as a danger to anthropology, 
threatening to blur or erase the cultural dis­
tinctiveness of places that is our stock in trade. 
If, on the other hand, it is acknowledged that 
cultural difference is produced and maintain ed 
in a field of power relations in a world always 
already spatially interconnected, then the 
restriction of immigration becomes visible as 
one of the main means through which the dis­
empowered are kept that way. 
The enforced "difference" of places becomes, 
in this perspective, part and parcel of a global 
system of domination. The anthropological 
task of de-naturalizing cultural and spatial divi­
sions at this point links up with the political task 
of combating a very literal "spatial incarcera­
tion of the native" (Appadurai 1988) within 
economic spaces zoned, as it were, for poverty. 
In this sense, changing the way we think about 
the relations of culture, power, and space opens 
the possibility of changing more than our texts. 
There is room, for instance, for a great deal 
more anthropological involvement, both theo­
retical and practical, with the politics of the 
US/Mexico border, with the political and orga­
nizing rights of immigrant workers, and with 
the appropriation of anthropological concepts 
of "culture" and '"difference" into the repres­
sive ideological apparatus of immigration law 
and the popular perceptions of "foreigners" 
and "aliens." 
A certain unity of place and people has been 
long assumed in the anthropological concept 
of culture. But anthropological representations 
and immigration laws notwithstanding, "the 
native" is ••spatially incarcerated" only in part. 
The ability of people to confound the estab­
lished spatial orders, either through physical 
movement or through their own conceptual 
and political acts of re-imaginarion, means 
that space and place can never be "given," and 
that the process of their sociopolitical 
construction must always be considered. An 
anthropo logy whose objects are no longer 
conceived as automatically and naturally 
anchored in space will need to pay particular 
attention to the way spaces and places are 
made, imagined, contested, and enforced. In 
this sense, it is no paradox to say that 
questions of space and place are, in this 

SPACE, IDENTITY, AND THE POLITICS OF DIFFERENCE 345 
deterritorialized age, more central to anthro­
pological representation than ever. 
Conclusion 
In suggesting the requestioning of the spatial 
assumptions implicit in the most fundamental 
and seemingly innocuous concepts in the social 
sciences such as "culture," "society,, "com­
munity," and .. nation," we do not presume to 
lay out a detailed blueprint for an alternative 
conceptual apparatus. We do, however, wish 
to point out some promising directions for the 
future. 
One extremely rich vein has been tapped 
by those attempting to theorize interstitiality 
and hybridity: in the postcolonial situation 
(Bhabha 1989; Hannerz 1987; Rushdie 1989); 
for people living on cultural and national 
borders (Anzaldua 1987; Rosaldo 1987, 1988, 
1989); for refugees and displaced peoples 
(Ghosh 1989; Malkki 1992); and in the case 
of migrants and workers (Leonard 1992). The 
"syncretic, adaptive politics and culture·· of 
hybridity, Bhabha points out (1989:64), ques­
tions "the imperialist and colonialist notions 
of purity as much as it question[s] the nation­
alist notions." It remains to be seen what kind 
of politics are enabled by such a theorization 
of hybridity and to what extent it can do away 
with all claims to authenticit y, to all forms of 
essentialism, strategic or otherwise (see espe­
cially Radhakrishnan 1987). Bhabha points ro 
the troublesome connection between claims to 
purity and utopian releology in describing how 
he came to the realization that 
rhe only place in the world to speak from was 
at a point whereby contradiction, antagonism . 
the hybridities of cultural influence, the 
boundaries of nations, were not sublated into 
some utopian sense of liberation or return. 
The place to speak from was through 
those incommensurable contradictions within 
which people survive, are politically active. 
and change. ( 1989:67) 
The borderlands are just such a pla�e of 
incommensurable contradictions. The term 
does not indicate a fixed topographical site 
between two other fixed locales (nations, soci­
eties, cultures), but an interstitial zone of displacement and deterritorialization that 
shapes the identity of the hybridized subject. 
Rather than dismissing them as insignificant, 
as marginal zones, rhin slivers of land between 
stable places, we want to contend that the 
notion of borderlands is a more adequate con­
ceptualization of the "normal" locale of the 
posrmodern subject. 
Another promising direction that takes us 
beyond culture as a spatially localized phe­
nomenon is provided by the analysis of what 
is variously called "mass media," ''public 
culture," and the .. culture industry.'' (Espe­
cially influenrial here has been rhe journal, 
Public Culture.) Existing symbioncally with 
the commodity form, profoundly influencing 
even the remotest people rhat anrhropologists 
have made such a fetish of studying, mass 
media pose the clearest challenge to orthodox 
notions of culture. National, regional, and 
village boundaries have, of course, never con­
tained culture in the way that anthropological 
representations have often implied. However, 
the existence of a transnational puhlic sphere 
means that the fiction that such boundaries 
enclose cultures and regulate cultural exchange 
can no longer be sustained. 
The production and distribution of mass 
culture-films, television and radio programs, 
newspapers and wire services, recorded music, 
books, live concerts -is largely controlled 
by those notoriously placeless organizations, 
multinational corporations. The "public 
sphere" is therefore hardly .. public" with 
respect to conrrol over rhe representations that 
are circulated in it. Recent work in cultural 
studies has emphasiz ed the dangers of reduc­
ing the reception of multinational cultural 
production to the passive act of consump­
tion, leaving no room for the active creation 
by agents of disjunctures and dislocations 
between the flow of industrial commodities 
and cultural products. However , we worry at 
least as much about the opposite danger of cel­
ebratmg the inventiveness of those "con­
sumers'' of the culture industry (especially on 
the periphery) who fashion something quite 
different out of products marketed to them, 
reinterpreting and remaking them, sometimes 
quite radically, and sometimes in a direction 
that promotes resistance rather than confor­
mity. The danger here is the temptation to use 

346 AKHIL GUPTA AND JAMES FERGUSON 
scattered examples of the cultural flows drib­
bling from the "periphery" to rhe chief centers 
of the culture industry as a way of dismissing 
the "grand narrative" of capitalism (especially 
the "totalizing" narrative of late capitalism), 
and thus of evading the powerful political 
issues associated with Western global 
hegemony. 
The reconceptualization of space implicit in 
theories of interstitiality and public culture has 
led to efforts to conceptualize cultural differ­
ence without invoking the orthodox idea of 
"culture." This is a yet largely unexplored and 
underdeveloped area. We do, clearly, find the 
clustering of cultural practices that do not 
"belong" to a particular "people" or to a def­
inite place. Jameson (1984) has attempted to 
capture the distinctiveness of these practices in 
the notion of a "cultural dominant," whereas 
Ferguson (1990) proposes an idea of "cultural 
style," which searches for a logic of surface 
practices without necessarily mapping such 
practices onto a "total way of life" encom­
passing values, beliefs, attitudes, et cetera, as 
in the usual concept of culture. We need to 
explore what Homi Bhabha calls "the uncanny 
of cultural difference." 
[C]ulrural difference becomes a problem not 
when you can point to the Hottentot Venus, 
or to the punk whose hair is six feet up in the 
air; it does not have that kind of fixable visi­
bility. It is as the strangeness of the familiar 
that it becomes more problematic, both polit-icaUy and conceptually ... when the problem 
of cultural difference is ourselves-as-others, 
others-as-ourselves, that borderline. (1989:72) 
Why focus on that borderline? We have 
argued that deterritorialization has destabi­
lized the fixity of "ourselves" and "others." 
But it has not thereby created subjects who are 
free-floating monads, despite what is some­
times implied by those eager to celebrate 
the freedom and playfulness of the post­
modern condition. As Martin and Mohanty 
(1986:194) point out, indetermin acy, too, has 
its political limits, which follow from the 
denial of the critic's own location in multiple 
fields of power. Instead of stopping with the 
notion of deterritori alization, the pulverization 
of the space of high moderni ty, we need to the­
orize how space is being reterritorialized in the 
contemporary world. We need to account soci­
ologically for the fact that the "distance" 
between the rich in Bombay and the rich in 
London may be much shorter than that 
between different classes in "the same" city. 
Physical location and physical territory , for so 
long the only grid on which cultural difference 
could be mapped, need to be replaced by mul­
tiple grids that enable us to see that connec­
tion and contiguity -more generally the 
representation of territory -vary considerably 
by factors such as class, gender, race, and sex­
uality, and are differentially available to those 
in different locations in the field of power. 

