27 
Ethnography in/of 
Transnational Processes: 
Following Gyres in the 
Worlds of Big Science and 
European Integration 
Stacia E. Zabusky 
Although this essay concerns scientists and cit­
izens in Europe, I begin not with physics, pol­
itics, or polemics but with poetry, specifically 
these lines from William Butler Yeats's �The 
Second Coming": 
Turning and rurning in the widening gyre 
The falcon cannot hear the falconer; 
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; 
Mere anarchy is loosed upon rhe world 
It is not Yeats's theory of the end of Chris­
tendom and the coming of some .. rough beast 
slouching towards Bethlehem" (or, in my case, 
Brussels) that concerns me here. I want instead 
to call attention to the image of the "widening 
gyre" with its constant, shifting movement, 
pulling apart a center that becomes more 
attenuated with every turn of the falcon's 
wings, a dissipating center over which the fal­
coner has lost all control. I will suggest here that when doing ethnog­
raphy in moments and contexts of political 
reconstruction and instability, we -ethnogra­
phers and participants alike -confront and 
move not through "social fields" but "widen­
ing gyres" in which "the center cannot hold." 
In such contexts, centers displace other cen­
ters, peripheries mutate into centers, and cen­
ters and peripheries pile atop one another , now 
dissolving the distinctions, now recreating 
them in another place. No one is in control of 
this ongoing "gyration," this making and 
unmaking of centers -people stumble through 
these gyres, improvising some place to stand 
for a moment, a place where they try to get 
something done. 
What are the implications for ethnography 
if we recognize social spaces delimited not by 
fields but instead by gyres? What, more par­
ticularly, are the implications for the ethnog­
raphy of the privi lege� and the powerful, if 
Stacia E. Zabusky, "Ethnography in/of Transnational Processes: Following Gyres in the Worlds of Big Science 
and European lnregrarion," pp. 113-45 from Carolj. Greenhouse, Elizabeth Mertz, and Kay B. Warren (eds.), 
Ethnography in Unstable Places: Everyday Ltves in Contexts of Dramatic Political Change (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2002). © 2002 Duke University Press. 

ETHNOGRAPHY IN/OF TRANSNA TIONAL PROCESSES 369 
these gyres simultaneously generate and dis­
place centers? These are the questions I will 
address here through a consideration of what 
we might call a "happy case" of reconstruc­
tion and instability: space-science mission 
development in Western Europe. 1 I call this a 
happy case because the situation I address 
differs in significant respects from those 
addressed by many of the other contributors 
to this volume. Their essays discuss more 
painful and tragic cases as they confront insta­
bilities arising out of war, violence, disloca­
tion, and poverty. 
Space science in Europe seems, by contrast, 
ro take shape in a context of remarkable sta­
bility and comparative calm as its participants 
are able to pursue technical activities undis­
turbed by such massive traumas as urban 
poverty or genocide. Space science in Europe is 
in fact a domain of activity characterized by 
tremendous productivity; every year, scientists 
and engineers in Europe are involved in the 
launch of new missions, including such projects 
as the orbiting Hubble Space Telescope (in 
which the Europeans are active and integral 
partners with NASA), the Giotto space probe 
(launched by the European Space Agency in 
1985 to observe Ha lley's comet at close range), 
and the Huygens space probe (a European 
Space Agency mission launched in the fall of 
1977 to study Titan, one of Sarurn's moons). 
These missions have been, even with inevitable 
and much publicized flaws, successful in innu­
merable ways: they return data to scientists 
that result in discoveries and publications; they 
push the boundaries of technological capabili­
ties for engineers; they fuel high-tech industries 
with multimillion dollar contracts; and they 
contribute to the political viability and exis­
tential reality of the European Union. I will 
argue, however, that it is not political or pro­
fessional stability that leads to this productiv­
ity; instead productivity emerges from the 
participants' ongoing struggle to find and make 
stability while engaged in the daily work of 
European cooperation in space science. It is a 
struggle because participants find themselves 
working at the intersection of two powerful 
transnational processes: European integration 
and big science. These processes continually 
destabilize productions as varied as satellites, 
individual careers, and government organiza-tions, making it difficult to identify any one 
domain as the centralized locus of decision and 
activity. Thus, for participants, productivity is 
achieved through what they experience as 
instability and uncertai nty, as they improvise 
moments of clarity in which work can get done 
and lives can be lived. 
This is no easy task. Participants struggle to 
construct missions that meet their professional 
or intellectual needs in the face of constant 
shifts in political priorities, organizational 
policies, and economic reallocations over 
which they have little or no control. Those 
involved in mission development thus often 
recognize their achievemen ts only in rhe past 
tense; in the present moment, and in the future 
that stretches before them as so many techni­
cal "milestones" to be reached, they can see 
only a barrage of impediments, as the fluid 
circumstances of European integration and 
big science engulf them in endless gyrations, 
unsettling them at every turn. This constant 
upheaval engenders experiences of frustration, 
alienation, and cynicism, as participants see 
themselves as unable to control core resources 
or direct those activities necessary to complete 
their work. Such experiences are countered, 
however, by the excitement that comes from 
improvising in the spaces of power, where par­
ticipants make use of the cultural materials 
provided by science and state in an oscillating 
dynamic of domination and resistance that 
ultimately leads to production. 
In what follows, I tell a story about how I 
came to notice these improvisations in the 
context of space-science mission development 
in Europe. The story begins with the problems 
I encountered when conceptu alizing how to 
frame or conduct an ethnographic project in 
the transnational arenas of European integra­
tion and big science. It moves on to consider 
how I realized that there were neither clear­
cut normative communities (for example, the 
international scientific community or even the 
European Community) nor definitive social 
fields (for example, bounded nation-states and 
organizations) in which I could pursue field­
work in any traditional sense; there were, 
instead, widening gyres and constant improvi­
sations. In the course of such realizations, I 
found the problem of power increasingly com­
plicated and complicating. 

370 STACIA E. ZABUSKY 
Context: Transnational 
Processes Reviewed 
When I began to plan my project in 1987, 
intent on conducting fieldwork in a more or 
less traditional vein, the prospect of studying 
the large-scale transnational processes of Euro­
pean integration and big science from inside 
seemed daunting, to say the least. These were 
momentous and gargantuan undertakings, 
characterized as much, if not more, by institu­
tional and bureaucratic maneuverings of 
grand proportions as by any set of local, inti­
mate practices more amenable to ethnographic 
analysis. Moreover, both these processes 
seemed defined more by constant change than 
by definitive structures; at every moment, 
political, economic, and organizational reali­
ties shifted, challenging my ability to home in 
on a place I could call "the field." 
I had to consider, in the first place, the larger 
political-economic context of reconstruction 
that defines European integration. Coming on 
the heels of the devastation wrought by Wo rld 
War II, this "regional impulse" (Twitchett 
1980: 7) seeks to produce a new and perma­
nent set of political arrangements among the 
states of Europe. European integration is an 
attempt to forge a unified Europe, to turn mul­
tiple nation-states into a superstate with a new, 
singular "center." It is a project that operates 
at the level and borders of nation-states, where 
national economies, political parties, and 
social welfare policies dominate analysis and 
action. Although this integration takes place in 
multiple venues, the primary symbolic and 
institutional locus of this project is the Euro­
pean Union or EU (known at the time of my 
research as the European Community or EC). 
To date, this movement toward integra­
tion has been highly successful. Institutions, 
treaties, laws, and contracts have established 
increasing connections across state bound­
aries; common standards for industry and 
manufacturing have been developed and put 
into practice; national economies are coordi­
nated in the European Monetary System; 
borders have been demolished as people show 
their common red passport identifying them as 
co-citizens of this new superstate (see BuiJ 
1993, Twitchett 1980, Varenne 1993). Thus, since its inception, integration as a project is 
one that has been constantly on the move; 
however , it is not always forward moving. It 
has been challenged repeatedly by problems of 
both identity and control. 
The identity problem is in part definitional, 
as member states of the European Union 
ponder just what criteria (beyond economic 
health) are necessary and sufficient for extend­
ing membership to applicant nation-states. 
Who can be considered part of a unified 
"Europe"? For a long while, the primary ques­
tion was whether the Scandinavian states and 
the traditionally neutral states of Switzerland 
and Austria would be interested in joining or 
would be welcomed by this common European 
market. Another vexing question was whether 
Turkey, eager to join in and already a member 
of NATO, could really be considered "western" 
enough to fit in to a European alliance. These 
questions of belonging, of who and what was 
culturally , properly, and legitimately Euro­
pean, have been challenged anew with the 
advent of perestroika and glasnost in the 
Soviet Union in the late 1980s and the fall of 
the Berlin Wall in 1989. Along with the 
restructuring of economies, politics, and social 
policies in the countries of the former Eastern 
Bloc, have come new applications from the 
countries of central and eastern Europe to join 
what had been a purely "western" European 
endeavor . The identity of the evolving super­
state has been in constant flux, as voters and 
leaders consider who can be now and in the 
future definitively European. 
The issues promoting instability in Euro­
pean integration concern more than identity 
and belonging, however , and address the 
ever-thorny issue of control. In the politi cal 
arena, the transnational process of integration 
requires individual states to give up sover­
eignty in at least some arenas in return for 
increased collective power on a world stage. It 
is no easy matter, however, to demand that 
states give up power or redefine their centers, 
any more than it is an easy matter to identify 
citizens of these different states only as 
"Europeans," passports notwithstandi ng. 
Some "peripheral" groups have seen in this 
movement a liberating potential: women's 
groups, peace groups, environmental groups, 
and ethnic groups all have begun to take their 

ETHNOGRAPHY IN/OF TRANSNATIONAL PROCESSES 371 
cases and their issues directly to this new, 
growing center, in an effort to bypass those 
state structures which have silenced them for 
so long. Such groups seek incorporation and 
inclusion for all the diverse "peoples" of 
Europe (for example, see Darian-Smith 2002; 
Galtung 1989; Stephens 1993). Many others 
see in this new center a threat to their inde­
pendence and identities, and, indeed, there 
have been frequent paroxysms of resistance to 
this project, whether in the form of Britain's 
refusal to join in the beginning and again 
under Margaret Thatcher, or in Charles de 
Gaulle's refusal to let Britain join when it 
finally wanted in, or in the withdrawal of 
Britain from the European Monetary System -
or, on a more local level, the violent protests 
by French farmers and fishermen, and referen­
dum in which Danish citizens rejected the 
Maastricht Treaty (only ultimately to vote to 
accept it). These independent movements, 
these denials and objections to increasing 
union are all part of the inexorable trend 
toward integration (see also Gerlach and 
Radcliffe 1979), themselves an expression of 
the profound "reconstruction" that is under­
way as Europe seeks to redefine its center(s). 
Besides European integration, there were 
also the complex dynamics of big science to 
consider as I developed a fieldwork project. Big 
science, too, represents a form of transnational 
reconstruction, albeit an ongoing, temporary 
one, in that it challenges the defined and fixed 
boundaries of nation-states in order to reach 
the desired end. Historical ly, scientists have 
long respected and insisted on the value of 
cooperating across state boundaries; in the 
familiar rhetoric of science, all practitioners 
are accorded membership in an "international 
scientific community" which extends its citi­
zenship to all scientists regardless of national­
ity (Zabusky n.d.). Accordingly , in the interests 
of pursuing their research scientists have 
always seemed particularly able to move about 
the world with ease, taking up residence now 
in this country, now in that, regardless of their 
countries of origin. As scientific interests 
became realizable only within more and more 
complex technologies, states and industrial 
capital became enmeshed in the development 
of these monumental, "disinterested" projects 
(see, for example, Galison and Hevly 1992). The idea of international cooperation is now 
glorified not only by scientists but also by 
states and industries, as they undertake big 
science in a context of global capitalism. Such 
projects by definition depend on transnational 
flows of people, technology, and capital for the 
production of functioning artifacts, whether 
they are the Channel Tunnel, the Ariane roc­
ket, or the particle accelerator at the European 
Center for Nuclear Research (CERN). 
Space science in Europe developed in a 
context of superpower rivalry; the "space 
race" between the former Soviet Union and the 
United States left the Europeans in a small, vir­
tually invisible position to begin their own 
space pursuits. Their efforts required the for­
mation of alliances among states, the infusion 
of capital into new central locations, and the 
conscription of human participants focusing 
on the myriad technical, economic, and social 
details that together constitute a large, inte­
grated artifact (Zabusky 1995). These arrange­
ments introduced, and continue to introduce, 
"instability" into state goals, partjcuJar insti­
tutions, and individual lives. States continue to 
shift, or manipulate, national interests to meet 
international goals of cooperation, accommo­
dating other centers in an effort to retain some 
power for themselves. The infusion of capital 
leads to the establishment of joint institutions 
that then take on lives of their own, becoming 
new ''centers" which have to be accommo­
dated. And people must move, accommodat­
ing themselves not only to the pressures of 
cooperation on the microlevel but to the pres­
sures of reconstructing homes and selves in 
foreign lands (see Zabusky 1995). 
These transnational processes of European 
integration and big science, with their mam­
moth proportions and rationalizing tenden­
cies, conjure up many of the dreams and 
terrors of modernity including those of cen­
tralized states and technological utopias (or 
dystopias). At the time that I was planning my 
research project, such nightmares did not con­
stitute a typical domain for inquiry in cultural 
anthropology; although, in the wake of the 
cultural studies movement, anthropologists 
have increasingly turned an eye toward such 
nightmares (or fantasies, depending on one's 
point of view}. Nonetheless, it was out of 
this contradictory and constantly changing 

372 STACIA E. ZABUSKY 
maelstrom of state-building and science that I 
attempted to construct a field to which I could 
go to conduct an ethnographic research 
project. 
Conceptu alizing Fieldwork: 
Theoretical Difficu lties 
I faced a series of conceptual problems when 
imagining my ethnographic project. A major 
problem was that, for a lone anthropologist 
interested in the grounded, lived experiences of 
real people working out the myriad details of 
daily life, it was difficult to conceptualize a 
"cultural" study of such macro-level, large­
scale, encompassing phenomena as "interna­
tional scientific cooperation" or "big science" 
or "European integration ." These transna­
tional domains seemed to be empty of people, 
defined instead, as I have briefly describe� 
here, by the political-economic and practical­
technical goals of states, organizations, and 
technolo gy. Without people, it seemed that 
there could be no ethnography. Or perhaps the 
problem really was that the only people who 
were there -making policy, signing memo­
randa of understanding, connecting wires, 
studying electronic signals - were people who 
had .. cuJture" squeezed out of them by their 
involvement in the rational, instrumental, and 
technical practices of state, bureauc racy, and 
science. Bureaucrats, technocrats, scientists, 
and engineers often seemed to revel in their 
rationality rather than their culturality; Sharon 
Traweek ( 1988) described this phenomenon, 
in the case of American high-ener gy physicists, 
as "the culture of no culture." 
This sense that people engaged in such activ­
ities are themselves empty of culture prevented 
anthropologists from turning their attention to 
these remarkable social processes for a long 
time, even after anthropolo gists began ethno­
graphic study of Western societies. In part this 
resulted from the historical legacy of the divide 
between sociology and anthropolo gy, in which 
sociology claimed as its disciplinary territory 
the study of modern, complex (Western) soci­
eties and their attendant institutions (such as 
organizations, professions, and science), while 
anthropolo gy turned its disciplinary attention 
to the "non-Western world." (All this was rather like the way the superpowers divided up 
the globe into delimiting spheres of influence.) 
This division of labor itself, however , led to or 
at least reflected a particular facet of anthro­
pology's world-view , namely, its preoccupation 
with and glorification of the exotic. As so 
many scholars have reminded us in recent 
years, cultural anthropolo gy's fascination with 
the primitive, the marginal, and the peripheral, 
caused us to construct the Other in a particu­
lar way, in a way that fed our own needs and 
interests (see Clifford and Marcus 1986; 
Taussig 1987). Simultaneously, by taking the 
Others as objects of cultural study, we made it 
possible to ignore or forget that we, roo, had 
culture. Only those Others out there, with 
strange customs, bizarre rituals, and mystical 
beliefs, all of which required explication and 
analysis in rational terms, had culture. 
That perspective derives in part from the 
ideology of rationality on which modernity 
depends. The ideology itself defines rationality 
in opposition to culture, and, as Traweek's 
notion of the "culture of no culture" suggests, 
this is the point of view to which technocrats, 
scientists, and engineers of all kinds subscribe. 
Those involved in the work of organizations 
and technology insist that they transcend the 
petty preoccupations and contaminating influ­
ences of politics, identity, and emotion in their 
everyday working lives, if not their personal 
lives, although the boundary is drawn blurrily 
if at all. If, then, there were no culture in 
the processes of bureaucr acy, technology, and 
science, then there was also no reason for 
anthropolo gists to pay any attention to those 
activities, organizations, or those involved in 
them, since anthropologists are supposed to 
study culture almost by definition. 
In this way, anthropologists have long been 
seduced by the ideology of rationality that we 
also endeavor to critique, embracing the exotic 
objects of our inquiry our of a conviction 
that they, alone, continued to live in worlds 
enchanted by culture. Even with the erosion 
and loss brought about by imperialism, 
colonialism, state-building, capitalism, and 
increasing tourism, it has transpired that only 
those Others retain and contain the comforts 
and excitements of culture, while we (edu­
cated, bourgeois, professional), on the other 
hand, have been rendered bland and dull by 

ETHNOGRAPHY IN/OF TRANSNATIONAL PROCESSES 373 
modernity -"no culture here," we might say, 
whether approvingly or in lament. As Charles 
Taylor ( 1989) has written, to many of us in the 
contemporary world, it appears that life at the 
center is fundamentally "disenchant ed., 
That sense of emptiness haunted my initial 
efforts to imagine a cultural study of scientists 
and engineers at work on European space 
science missions, especially because at this time 
there were virtually no such studies to emulate. 
What could there possibly be to look at that 
would interest an anthropologist? Perhaps 
such studies shouJd be left to our colleagues in 
other disciplines, with their highly developed 
analytic tools for examining rational choice, 
decision-making, institution-building, and the 
like. I remained convinced, nonetheless, that 
there were people with culture, even here, in 
the midst of bureaucracies and high technol­
ogy, people whose lives we needed to under­
stand ethnographically if we were to have a 
complete picture of the impact of modernity 
on ordinary lives in the Western world. 
Modernity, after all, was a cultural space and 
not simply a rational space, even if ideologies 
of rationality characterized its culture. Ethnog­
raphy as a method of inquiry offered an 
opportunity to understand peoples' experi­
ences of modernit y, in its apparently new 
transnational incarnation, from "the natives' 
point of view" -which still seems to me to 
be the hallmark of an anthropological 
approach, the problematic status of that native 
notwithstanding. 
Conceptu alizing Fieldwork: 
Practical Difficul ties 
Theoretical convictions aside, my knowing 
that people doing the work of modernity also 
had culture that needed to be studied ethno­
graphically did not solve a second, more prac­
tical problem: to learn about living cultural 
processes, I had to go do fieldwork some­
where. Indeed, the explicit rules and regula­
tions of dissertation approval and grant 
writing insisted that I establish an "area" and 
a "site" in which to do fieldwork. Moreover , 
the implicit rules of the discipline of anthro­
pology mandated that I be an ethnograp her, 
one known primarily by my geographic area and published and hired in terms of it. My 
interests in transnational processes, how­
ever, made such defining difficult. Most 
Europeanists, after all, went to particular vill­
ages or towns in particular nation-states, and 
funding opportunities were typically con­
structed according to such criteria. Where, 
though, was "Europe, (as opposed to its con­
stituent nation-states )? Where was "the inter­
national scientific community" since it was, by 
definition, everywhere? 
The existing ethnographic literature did not 
provide much guidance in this regard. Euro­
peanist studies in anthropology had by and 
large focused on rural villages (Cole 1977� 
Ennew 1980) or perhaps urban enclaves and 
neighborhoods (Belmonte 1979; Kenny and 
Kertzer 1983 ). There was a decided lack of 
interest in the high-level, political machina­
tions to produce a united Europe; this was a 
topic for political scientists to study. Cultural 
anthropologists found it difficult even to con­
sider turning their attention to "Europe." The 
only way, it seemed, for anthropologists 
to attack the problem of "Europe" was at 
the village level, where analysis could show 
how European integration was irrelevant to, 
imposed on, or resisted by local people. 
The literature in science studies, too, did not 
afford much support. There was a plethora of 
studies in the international dimensions of 
science, but these were historical, economic, 
and political in orientation (for example, 
Ben-David 1971, Merton 1973). There was a 
burgeoning literature in the ethnography of sci­
entific work, led by the pioneering laboratory 
study of Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar 
(1979), that claimed to use an anthropological 
approach to the study of science. However, the 
majority of such "laboratory ethnographies" 
were ensconced in the sociology of knowledge 
tradition, and their arguments were developed 
and carried out in opposition to a nonempiri­
cal philosophy of science (for example, Lynch 
1985, Knorr-Cetina and Mulkay 1983). As 
such, these ethnographies, while using 
participant-observation techniques, were not 
framed in the universe of cultural questions 
typically posed by anthropologists. More 
problematic from the point of view of con­
ceptualizing a fieldwork study of big science, 
such small-scale, micro-oriented studies of 

374 STACIA E. ZABUSKY 
science created a cleanly bounded social space 
for ethnographic work; from these studies, it 
was difficult to know whether there were 
transnational processes that established or 
affected such laboratories, or whether there 
was any structure at all beyond the microinter­
actions around a laboratory bench (Hagendijk 
1990). All context had been radically excised, 
precisely the kind of context that interested me. 
These were not studies of how, for instance, 
international scientific cooperation actually 
worked; these were instead studies of the epis­
temological processes and problems confronted 
by generic scientists -how they knew what they 
knew, not how they did what they did. 
Villages and laboratories, then, did not 
provide me with a solution of how to concep­
tualize an ethnographic study of the massive 
reconstructions accompanying European 
integration and big science. Moreover , these 
transnational processes made it difficult to 
identify any one space or site where the pro­
ductive work got done. Yet, I had to identify 
some bounded site that provided a home for 
the people who made up the amorphous 
international communities of science and of 
Europe, a place where I could pursue ethno­
graphic inquiry. In the end, I decided quite self­
consciously to conceptualize my study in terms 
of "semi-autonomous social fields," which are, 
as Sally Falk Moore (1978:55) has written, the 
"'most suitable way of defining areas for social 
anthropological study in complex societies ." 
Social fields generate their own internal rules 
and customs, yet are simultaneously "vulnera­
ble to rules and decisions and other forces 
emanating from the larger world by which 
[they are] surrounded" (emphasis mine). Thus 
defined, the image of the social field was of 
ever-widening concentric circles, in which inte­
rior social fields were embedded. 
I slowly narrowed my focus from the widest 
concentric circles of "European integration" 
and "scientific cooperation," until I found a 
circle small enough to do fieldwork in. The 
social field I first identified was the European 
Space Agency (ESA). Founded out of two prog­
enitor organizations in 1974, ESA was dedicated 
to the production of space technology to benefit 
European commercial and intelJectual life. At 
the same time, it proclaimed itself proudly to 
be (and was regarded as) a participant in the political efforts to forge a united Europe. For 
instance, Helmut Kohl, chancellor of Germany, 
stated during an address at the jubilee celebra­
tion marking ESA's twenty-fifth anniversary 
that "the joint European conquest and utilisa­
tion of space also strengthens the European 
identity, and this makes ESA's activities a major 
factor in building Europe as a political entity, 
(European Space Agency 1989:20). ESA 
appeared, thus, as just the kind of "semi­
autonomous social field" Moore had in mind: 
a definable social, political, and economic 
organization embedded in the larger fields of 
European integration and international big 
science. But selecting the ESA did not immedi­
ately solve the fieldwork problem. The organi­
zation presented formidable methodological 
challenges since it was made up of many smaller 
establishments spread throughout Europe; the 
four primary ones included the headquar ters in 
Paris, a telemetry center near Frankfurt, an 
archives and computation center near Rome, 
and the research and development center 
near Amsterdam, along with numerous sub­
sidiary locations in Nice, Cologne, Madrid, 
Redu in Belgium, Sweden, and so on. Where to 
go? 
I chose the European Space Research and 
Technology Center (ESTEC), the main research 
and technology center located in the Nether­
lands, where most of the technical and scien­
tific work was carried out. In order to find a 
manageable social field in which to do my 
fieldwork, I narrowed my focus even further 
to a particular department in this institution -
the Space Science Department (ssn). Here, ESA 
staff scientists were charged with the responsi­
bility of coordinating the efforts of other sci­
entists, engineers, and technicians from across 
Europe in designing, developing, and manu­
facturing ESA space-science missions. This was 
where I eventually took up residence to carry 
out ethnographic fieldwork from 1988 to 
1989. In the time-honored manner of 
participant-observers since Malinowski, I 
spent my days watching and listening to the 
European professionals who worked together 
daily. My informants were engaged in their 
own magical and practical tasks: designing and 
testing spacecraft and instruments such as 
mass spectrometers, telescopes, and imagers; 
convening, attending, and complaining about 

ETHNOGRAPHY IN/OF TRANSNA TIONAL PROCESSES 375 
meetings; and gathering data and dreaming 
about magnetic fields, cosmic radiation, stars, 
galaxies, and the solar wind. It was this work, 
this quotidian, technical, focused work, that 
turned out to be the stuff of transnatio nalism. 
This was where it all happened-transnational 
forces were produced in the turn of a screw, 
the click of a mouse, an argument in the cor­
ridor. Indeed, without the ordinary routines 
and decisions worked out here at this conflu­
ence of transnational streams, there would be 
no ESA, no European integration, no interna­
tional scientific commun ity. 
Executing Fieldwork: 
Ethnographic Challenges 
I settled into a daily fieldwork routine at SSD 
to explore the contours of this social field. 
Overtly, my daily experience was straight­
forward and clear. There I was, undeniably 
in some place watching people design and 
develop some thing. Everyday, I traveled by 
· bus to ESTEC, located by a small coastal village 
near the Hague, where scientists, engineers, 
computer specialists, technicians, statisticians, 
lawyers, and accountants from thirteen differ­
ent European countries worked together to 
produce space missions for ESA. The physical 
plant occupied thirty-five beautifully land­
scaped hectares and included several multi­
story buildings of wood, concrete, metal, and 
glass. Inside the buildings, there was a pro­
liferation of technical equipment: computer 
terminals in every office, huge laboratory 
facilities filled with instruments, and in­
production satellites that protruded wires, 
antennae, and the shimmering blue panels 
of power-g enerating solar arrays. Inside the 
buildings, I observed countless meetings of 
teams, working groups, and departments, 
yawned during tedious sessions in the labora­
tories as technicians and engineers tested 
equipment, listened to arguments, and partic­
ipated in conversations about frustrations and 
dreams. 
It all seemed quite solid. I had found a 
clearly defined social field where work got 
done, a social field circumscribed by and 
embedded in larger, contextualizing fields, and 
a semiautonomous social field party inventing its own rules, partly dependent on the rules 
emanating toward it from some exterior, more 
encompassing, circle. Yet I was plagued by a 
vague sense that sso was not far enough 
inside, that I needed to move in closer to a 
circle that was more relevant, more defined 
and confined than that of sso. One reason for 
my unease was that, despite the presence of 
many technological artifacts, most of those rel­
evant to space science missions rarely, if ever, 
made a physical appearan ce at ESTEC. Most 
of the time, spacecraf t, instruments, and tele­
scopes for space science missions were simply 
represented, visually in models, photographs, 
blueprints, and computer-generated designs, 
and in talk about specifications, delays, and 
testing. 
Not only were the technological compo­
nents not in evidence, but more and more it 
appeared that, organizational charts notwith­
standing, neither was sso. This administrative 
unit held little or no experiential significance 
for the scientists who worked at ESTEC. No one 
except upper management conceived of sso as 
a meaningful social entity. Indicative of this 
lack was the fact that staff members routinely 
experienced tremendous difficulty in organiz­
ing department-wide activities. (For instance, 
the year that I was there, the sso Christmas 
holiday party was canceled due to insufficient 
interest.) Moreover, people never referred to 
themselves as members of sso but instead 
identified themselves by their profession or 
discipline (technician, engineer, astronomer , 
plasma physicist) or by the particular missions 
on which they were working (the Hubble 
Space Telescope, the Infrared Space Observa­
tory, and so forth). 
Eventually I realized that sso was not a 
relevant or recognized, perhaps not even a 
genuine, social field for European scientists; 
rather, missions were what really mattered to 
people. Instead of caring about or orienting 
themselves toward the activities of others in 
sso, sso scientists focused on the activities of 
the teams and working groups of profession­
als in diverse disciplines, departments, organi­
zations, and countries who were involved in 
making the mission a reality. These teams and 
working groups comprised networks of people 
in different locations but all working toward a 
common goal -the production of a particular 

376 STACIA E. ZABUSKY 
spacecraft. ln this way, missions served as, or 
perhaps produced, a significant kind of semi­
autonomous social field, even though they did 
not exist in any single physical space but rather 
came to exist through the work of collabora­
tion. The spacecraft in particular , with their 
technological components, scientific specifica­
tions, and data generation, seemed to focus 
everyone' s attention inward to the kind of 
bounded space that constituted a clearly 
delineated field site at the heart of the power­
ful transnational processes I was trying to 
understand. 
For this reason, after my initial exploration 
of the sso environment, I decided instead to 
focus on space-science missions as the relevant 
social field of ethnographic inquiry. But this 
final, narrowing step, made in an effort to get 
to the inside of these concentric circles of social 
fields, proved to be my undoing. The further 
inside I got-the closer to the careful working 
out of such details as mass budgets, payload 
configuration, ground system planning, and 
the like -the less and less it seemed as if I were 
inside anything at all. In the day-to-day rou­
tines of sso, 1 felt, as did participants, that the 
walls were dissolving. Mission work carried 
people off in different directions and oriented 
them toward other people and places even as 
they sat at their desks. 
AJI around me, people were acting not as 
if they were at the interior of anything, not 
of sso, nor ESTEC, nor even ESA. Instead, 
they treated such entities as opportunities, as 
resources, as gyres upon which they could 
hitch a temporary ride, only to get off again 
when other needs arose. They did this by lit­
erally breaching the walls of ESTEC: by travel­
ing, phoning, faxing, and e-mailing. They did 
this symbolica lly, as they manipulated, con­
structed, and unraveled reams of documen­
tation and the objects that these represented. 
Indeed, the visual and discursive representa­
tions of the technological artifacts that 
consumed participants' constant attention 
condensed and resonated with the partici­
pation of multiple professionals from multi­
ple sites (institutions, countries, disciplines ), 
making it impossible to think of myself as 
being inside a field in which I might either 
harvest or do ethnography; fields were too def­
inite, places where things grow inside clearly marked boundaries. What could be consider ed 
boundaries here? The staff scientists were in 
constant contact with all kinds of "outsiders": 
other ESA staff members at other establish­
ments, engineers in industry, scientists in Euro­
pean organizations, scientists in the United 
States, yet these were only "outsiders, to a 
social field called sso. From the perspective of 
the social field called a "mission," these others 
were intimate and integral participants in 
the ongoing process of space-science mission 
development. Their work, moreover, created 
independent sites (or gyres) of mission-r elated 
activity. Missions depended on a process that 
could not be confined in or defined by any 
single organization, any more than the people 
who worked at that particular physical plant 
could be singularly identified with it. Every 
detail -from what materials to use, to what 
temperature to test them at, to where to buy 
them, to how many to include -required con­
sideration and manipulation of social connec­
tions, alliances, and allegiances outside the 
offices of sso, through the walls of ESTEC, 
beyond the limits of ESA, past even the borders 
of European states. 
This was transnationalism in action. The 
process of space-science mission development 
contains no clear-cut interior or exterior; 
instead, every social field cuts across other 
social fields, creating areas of overlap at the 
moments and points at which they intersect. 
Overlapping is not embedding. This is not a 
series of regular concentric circles but instead 
is a wild ride on a gyre. To put it another way, 
instead of marking the limits and describing 
the interior features of some bounded field -
with hedges, trees, rows of plants - enclosed 
within yet other territorial borders, I found 
myself standing in a field that was being inun­
dated by streams of water flowing from mul­
tiple unseen points, washing away all trace of 
boundaries. The experience was not of "doing 
fieldwork, but of trying to "stem the tide, that 
seemed to sweep away physical or even dis­
cursive evidence of solid physical or social 
worlds. This is, as Emily Martin ( 1994) writes, 
the only experience possible in the "complex 
systems" which characterize the contempor ary 
world. She argues that "the complexly inter­
connected world in which we now live seems 
to say that ... the current nature of reality ... 

ETHNOGRAPHY IN/OF TRANSNATIONAL PROCESSES 377 
[is one in which all] is in flux, order is 
transient, nothing is independent, everything 
relates to everything else, and no one subsys­
tem is ever necessarily continuously in charge" 
(250). Productivi ty, in such a maelstrom of 
interconnections, is vulnerable to even the 
smallest fluctuations in the most distant 
reaches of the system; thus, "the enormity 
of the 'management' task ... becomes over­
whelming. Who will manage all this? Is anyone 
in control?" (122). 
Participants in ESA space-science mission 
development, too, recognized and articulated 
this experience of vulnerability, where the 
possibility of "catastrophic collapse" (Martin 
1994:130) looms menacin gly. As one ESA sci­
entist said to me about the mission he was 
working on: "This mission is one of the most 
complicated things ever put together by 
mankind. It has lots of bells and whistles; it is 
really a big technological experiment which 
represents the limits of what humanity can 
handle. That's why no one knows everything 
about it, and there are always problems lying 
in corners waiting to be stumbled on." One 
person's corner often turned out to be another 
person's center, and there was no falconer to 
call anyone back from the spiraling gyres, no 
one to say, definitiv ely, that this was it, the 
center, the source, the eye overseeing it all. In 
the dynamic currents of European integration, 
big science, and international scientific coop­
eration, technological components and human 
participants were swept along without regard 
to such social or physical boundaries as orga­
nizations or countries or corners. 
This experience repeated itself over and over 
during my stay in sso and posed significant 
challenges to the ethnographic endeavor. For 
instance, after I had been at ESTEC for some 
months and had made the transition to a focus 
on missions rather than the department, I 
finally felt that I had figured out all the impor­
tant players and groups and technologies. But 
once again I had the familiar sensation of 
vertigo during an interview with an ESA 
scientist, Ian (a pseudonym}, at sso. Ian was 
responsible for coordinating the scientific 
aspects of an instrument that ESA was provid­
ing to a mission being sponsored by another 
European national space agency. In our con­
versation, Ian told me about the process of building this instrument, which included a 
prototype design that had been created in sso, 
but which could be built in industry. The work 
on the electronics for this instrument had to be 
"contracted out,'' which mean that an indus­
trial firm had to be hired to do the work. 
Selecting this firm was not in the hands of the 
scientists and engineers in sso, however , but 
was rather in the hands of an international 
review board that was charged with the 
responsibility of ensuring that ESA distributed 
its contracts in a geographically fair manner: 
the principle of ;uste retour stipulated that the 
member states of ESA receive a "fair return" 
in proportion to their contributions to the 
agency's operating budget in the form of 
contracts for national industrial firms. This 
board, consisting primarily of industrial policy 
experts, reviewed documents provided by the 
scientists and engineers, who prepared these 
documents with the assistance of an ESA con­
tracts officer; its decisions were primarily 
based on "bottom-line" issues. This board set 
up yet another review board under its auspices 
to review both the financial and the technical 
and quality control issues on which the scien­
tists and engineers also reported. This board 
was known to be "fussy about format" and 
could conceivably ignore scientific or technical 
issues in favor of geography and/or budget. 
I had never heard about these review boards 
before, even though this configuration of 
people, capital, artifacts, and services was 
quite significant in determining the current 
arrangements that I saw around me, since 
together these boards made all decisions about 
major contract allocations for components or 
other technological development costing more 
than U.S. $800,000. I could not have encoun­
tered these boards earlier as they did not exist 
anywhere in particular but appeared only at 
the moment when called into being by a set of 
rules and regulations and by ongoing practices 
of participants. Only at that moment would 
the members of these boards, scattered in dif­
ferent countries throughout Europe, appear as 
"the board," a social group as ephemeral as 
the meeting they would hold, not scientists 
versed in the intimate derails of astronomy and 
detectors, yet powerful in determining the 
outcome of Ian's request. As I sat in that office 
talking to Ian, I had the sensation that a hole 

378 STACIA E. ZABUSKY 
was forming in the office wall, and through 
that hole I could see an entire world that had 
been invisible to me, but where Ian entered and 
circulated with ease. This was no field; this was 
a gyre, and the acceleration of that widening 
arc threatened to catapult me through that 
hole and into some strange, new land. I strug­
gled with that force, trying to decide whether 
to let go and follow Ian or whether to hold on 
tight, and try to keep the boundaries around 
this field intact. 
My methodological and ethnographic eff­
orts to Limit, confine, and contain people in 
this or that community or to confine them or 
their artifacts to this or that field was thus ren­
dered impossible as participants transcended, 
breached, or crossed such boundaries at every 
moment. Doing ethnography of the transna­
tional, then, required not just identifying a 
"site" in the sense of a social field where I 
could senJe down to do fieldwork; doing 
ethnography of the transnational meant 
instead being poised for movement, sensitive 
to flows and trajectories, to instability and 
reconstruction, to disruptions and re­
orientations. I had to be prepared to ride the 
ongoing currents of capital, people, and ser­
vices, and to see that what was significant was 
not the organizations, the communities, or 
even the anifacts, but instead the practices that 
created all of these things. There was, in the 
end, no sing.le, paramount place from which to 
observe these processes, no moment in time, 
no edifice, no organization that would provide 
the definitive view. Instead, I had to improvise 
my way through and to ethnographic research. 
Practices of 
Transnational ism: 
Improvisation and Cynicism 
My efforts to discover the appropriate social 
fields for ethnographic inquiry in the complex 
transnational arenas of European integration 
and big science had led me to search for my 
own "village" deep inside more powerful 
forces. In the process, I made solid and struc­
tured the organization of ESA (and with it the 
establishment that was ESTEC and the depart­
ment that was sso). In the end, however, these entitles turned out to have less experiential 
reality for participants than those villages of 
the proverbial "community studies" that were 
once the mainstay of ethnographic research in 
Europe. Indeed, physical edifices and the stric­
tures of bureaucratic rules and regulations 
aside, in the day-to-day process of working 
together, ESA appeared almost as a mirage, 
constantly disappearing in the swirling cur­
rents. These currents created, recreated, and 
dissolved ESA over and over again. In response, 
everyone had to keep improvising some 
common ground on which to stand. 
Structure and practice 
Before I explore the intricate dance of impro­
visation, I want briefly to turn my attention to 
structure, which certainly played a role both in 
the production and the ethnography of space­
science missions. Structure, as the "outcome" 
and "medium, of ongoing practices (Giddens 
1984 ), is reflected, for instance, in the accu­
mulation of capital in certain places where 
"gyres" overlap (often instantiated as organi­
zations and institutions). It was also apparent 
in the credentials and status accumulated by 
those who moved among various institutional 
and social networks. These credentials and 
status, often instantiated as titles like Project 
Manager or Principal Investigator or as acad­
emic degrees like PhD, signified access to 
capital and other resources. For instance, it 
was senior scientists with PhDs and high titles 
in university or research laboratories who 
served on ESA Science Teams; their status 
reflected their ability to control social and 
financial resources not available to those with 
less status or to those from poorer or marginal 
countries or institutions. 
Despite the undeniable significance of such 
structural aspects of this mode of production, 
it is not enough to demarcate such structures 
and then to assume stability in production. 
These are, after all, complex systems in which 
multiple networks and institutional structures 
are at work. No maner how much status par­
ticipating scientists might have accrued in one 
institutional domain (for example, as depart­
ment head of a national research laboratory) 
or social network (for example, as leading sci­
entist in the field of infrared astronomy), this 

ETHNOGRAPHY IN/OF TRANSNATIONAL PROCESSES 379 
status did not translate into power or even 
influence in the arenas through which these 
same scientists moved to produce a particular 
mission (for example, the Infrared Space 
Observatory Project managed by an ESA engi­
neer and in which the scientists' role was advi­
sory not supervisory ). 
Even in the local, day-to-day work on ESA 
space-science missions, participants felt this 
structural tension in their positions acutely. 
Although these were "scientific" missions, sci­
entists were not in control of the development 
process. In concrete terms, this lack of control 
manifested itself in the fact that the budgets for 
space-science mission development were con­
trolled by senior engineers (project managers) 
rather than scientists. During the course of 
development, scientists and engineers repeat­
edly found themselves pitted against each 
other ·in the ongoing negotiation of fund 
allocation that characterized the develop­
ment process. Funds were always scarce, and 
unanticipated delays or errors in design or 
manufacture could drain the budget rapidly. 
Scientists routinely complained that all project 
managers wanted to do when faced with rising 
costs was to "descope the payload," that is, to 
cut down on the number and size of the sci­
entific experiments that could be carried on 
board the satellite. These instruments were 
critical to the interests of the scientists since it 
was the instruments, rather than the satellite 
itself, that would collect and transmit the 
data that the scientists depended on for their 
research. Scientists thus complained that the 
engineers' efforts to save payload costs would 
in the end result in the launch of a "pointed 
brick," a hunk of metal incapable of detecting 
or imaging anything, even though it could be 
''pointed" at distant stars or galaxies. There 
was, thus, a structural tension at the core of 
this mode of production, a tension that was 
in part responsible for the dynamism of the 
process of space-science mission development. 
Improvisation 
Despite these significant structural constraints 
-of status, time, money, and personnel -"in 
the end of the day," as one of the scientists I 
knew was fond of saying to me, the scientists 
could nonetheless be proud of the first-rate missions that they produced. They produced 
them, however, not because of the structures 
that determined their positions in various 
networks and flows of capital, goods, and 
services, but rather almost in spite of them. 
They produced them by exploiting the multi­
ple structures, with concomitant contradic­
tions and tensions, that constituted their 
domain of practice. Thus, just as my own 
ethnographic technique had turned out to 
depend on split-second decisions to leap onto 
other gyres or to ride out the trajectories I was 
on, so too did ESA mission participants' prac­
tices take shape as an endless series of ongoing 
improvisations, across dangerously Aooded 
terrain, in which fields lay submerged beneath 
currents of uncertain ty. 
In certain respects, then, the participants' 
primary challenges were to establish some sta­
bility in the midst of this complexity so that 
they could get things done and move their pro­
jects forward. Participants resorted to various 
strategies for defining, even momentarily , some 
stability, as they tried to create spaces and 
moments where and when people could put 
their feet down. For instance, participants 
made every effort to construct discursive rep­
resentations of stable social networks, in large 
part for the purpose of getting work done. 
Once constructed, they would step into them, 
or define themselves in relation to them, even 
if in the next moment these entities would 
evaporate. An example of this can be found 
in the way that the staff scientists in sso, 
those who were the focus of my ethnographic 
inquiry, acknowledged their responsibility to 
"glue together a community." They talked 
about how "part of our work is to be out and 
about," meeting with scientists in other insti­
tutions and engineers in industry. This made 
sense to them "because the [scientific! com­
munity is all over the place, [so] you have 
to keep talking." By being ''out and about," 
they demonstrated the ephemerality of ESTEC, 
despite its physical presence. It is not location 
with definable ''insides" and "outsides" that 
determines a social field then, but rather 
"talk," at least in this case. In fact, as one par­
ticipant said, "the only thing to do is to keep 
talking'' if you want to get anything done. 
Thus, any community they attempted to forge 
could exist only in the moment, convened in 

380 STACIA E. ZABUSKY 
talk to solve a particular problem, or to 
produce a specific result. "Communi ty," said 
one sso scientist, "is only the guys you know, 
sitting around a table, working together"; 
once "the guys" went off to their own offices, 
deparonents, institutes, or countries, whatever 
social group had appeared in that social space 
no longer existed. 
In their ongoing efforts to make sense, to 
make connections, and to make stability, par­
ticipants manipuJared and asserted their com­
mitment to various ideas and ideals, only to 
undermine their own assertions in the next 
moment. Nothing ever seemed secure. Instead 
of the rational practices ideologica lly associ­
ated with bureaucracy, state, science, and tech­
nology, in which conscripts harmoniously 
follow rules and enact regulations in the 
instrumental interests of efficiency and order­
liness, there was instead constant argument, 
negotiation, and the bending of rules as people 
struggled, with politics, with scarcity, with 
emotional unpredictabilities, to produce arti­
facts that worked. Their struggles were carried 
out in terms of organizations (ESA, the Euro­
pean Union), of communities (the inter­
national scientific community and various 
national communities), and of other artifacts 
(detectors, computers, cryostats), but these 
solid structures did not define their practices, 
could not contain them, could not dictate 
them. They provided the terms in which argu­
ment, negotiation, and rule-bending occurred; 
they provided the resources with which people 
could do their arguing, negotiating, and 
manipulating; they appeared as the outcomes 
of these same practices {Giddens 1984) - but 
they were not the practices themselves. 
In practice, people took these materials of 
power and improvised with them. These 
improvisations appeared as contradictory ori­
entations in the practices and discourses of 
participants. For example, at some moments, 
sso scientists and their colleagues would argue 
that nationality did not maner in the intense 
concentration required to design and build sci­
entific instruments that would permit their 
users to discover the secrets of nature. ("When 
we get together in a meeting ... it's not a ques­
tion of being British, French, or whatever; 
we're just a group of scientists doing a job," 
said one sso scientist.) In this gyre, science and technology defined a powerful center, the 
source of a widening spiral that pushed aside 
nations, people, politics, and money. 
At other moments, these same scientists 
wouJd describe their endeavor s in terms 
of national differences, ascribing successes, 
failures, and strategies to different national 
customs or to different state interests. {"Ital­
ians are good at a lot of things, but not at 
making decisions," said one ESA engineer, 
while another sso scientist opined that "if you 
think of German efficiency, Dr Schmidt is it" 
[Zabusky 1995].) In this gyre, nation-st ates 
and their anendant "mentalities" defined a 
powerful center, the source of a widening 
spiral that pushed science, technology, and 
nature into the margins. Sometimes, these 
same scientists would describe themselves as 
those who safeguard ESA's interests in the face 
of constant demands from naive scientists in 
the academic world, from the excesses and 
incompetencies of industrial firms, from the 
parochial concerns of separate European states 
(see Zabusky 1992). In this gyre, ESA defined 
a powerful center, the source of a widening 
spiral that pushed science and state to the 
edges. In still other moments, these same sci­
entists would insist that industrial firms deter­
mined the missions selected and developed 
and that neither science, nor technolo gy, nor 
national interests had much to do with it. In 
this gyre, capital defined a powerful center, 
the source of a widening spiral that pushed 
national pride, scientific interest, and bureau­
cratic mandates into the margins. 
It is such protean discourses of identity and 
difference that are the improvisations through 
which participants cleared out spaces in which 
to do their work. At every moment, different 
gyres carried participants away from one 
center, making them more peripheral the 
further they followed its path. Every turn 
called up another improvisation, and, as mul­
tiple gyres spun of out of control, partici­
pants found themselves traveling from one to 
another, maintaining balance only by moving 
with the flows. 
Cynicism 
It is no wonder, given the participants' sense 
of shifting and unstable centers, that partici-

ETHNOGRAPHY IN/OF TRANSNA TIONAL PROCESSES 381 
pants also insisted that power was always 
somewhere else. Indeed, a critical part of life 
and work in the intersection of transnational 
flows is the overwhelming sense that the center 
- that place from which power emanates, dic­
tating rules and actions - is always under 
someone else's control. Yet this sense that par­
ticipants had of being out of control may seem 
paradoxical, or even hypocritical, given that 
the scientists and engineers who were the focus 
of my study worked for or at an organization 
that clearly appeared to be a source of power. 
In concrete, physical terms, this status was 
manifest at ESTEC in the chain-link security 
fence that surrounded the entire site, by the 
security policy that required visitors to leave 
their passports at the guardhouse, and by the 
multitude of BMWs, Mercedes, and Cadillacs 
found parked in its parking lms. 
ESA is an undeniably wealthy organization 
-its budget in 1988, at the time of my field­
work, was almost two billion dollars, amassed 
from the contributions made by its thirteen 
member states, and much of it was disbursed 
in turn to national industrial firms (Longdon 
1989). It is also undeniably an organization 
run by and dedicated to the interests of the 
elite-a site for science research and high tech­
nology production, "inhabited" by scientists, 
engineers, and lawyers who oversee the work 
of less powerful personnel such as technicians 
and custodians, and oriented toward produc­
ing competitive technoLogies to help national 
industries compete in a global marketplace. It 
is also undeniably a dominant political player 
-its governing body is made up of high-level 
national politicians whose presence under­
scores ESA's role in the construction of a new 
European union. In all these ways, ESA seems 
to exist exclusively to further the interests of 
capital and state. 
Nonetheless, the sso scientists in particular 
often felt at odds with ESA, and they made 
great efforts to distinguish themselves from its 
powerful grip. They articulated their resistance 
to such interests often in terms of "science" 
(versus politics) and sometimes in terms of 
"community" (versus bureaucracy ). Through­
out, they struggled for legitimacy and control 
of a technical process in which they were inte­
gral and crucial participants yet, from their 
perspective, undervalued and marginalized. The public rhetoric of ESA officials certainly 
made science seem significant in the overall 
scope of the agency's activities. A most elo­
quent statement of scienc e's role in the agency 
was made by Reimar Lust, director general of 
ESA during the time of my fieldwork, in a 1987 
address: 
To me. European space is a living vibrant 
entity, and like all living things it has a heart. 
For European space, rhar heart is rhe Space 
Science Programme [the ESA directorate 
responsible for space science missions]. It 
pumps out the blood of new ideas, fresh chal­
lenges, and technical innovation to the limbs 
of the application programmes. (5) 
As a living entity, it needed "oxygen," which 
could only be provided by more data produced 
by more missions that demanded more funds. 
This was not, in the history of the agency, easy 
to obtain. ESA had been established in 1964 
at the instigation of scientists who; in Lust's 
words, "jogged the political elbow" (2) to 
get a regional European space organization 
started. Liist remarked that "in the beginning 
there was some doubt that the enthusiasm of 
the scientists could be turned into a political 
reality" (2), but he went on to describe the 
many successes of the early incarnation of ESA 
(then the European Space Research Organisa­
tion). By 1974, however , member states had 
grown restless, tired of expensive missions that 
did not produce a clear benefit to them in 
terms of improved industry or increased 
capital. As a result, they lobbied for the cre­
ation of a new organization that would focus 
on "applications missions," in other words, 
missions with commercial application, and out 
of this "revolt" came ESA (Russo 1993). The 
tension between missions dedicated to "pure" 
scientific research and "applied" commercial 
ventures remains within ESA; member stares 
and industrial concerns do not see science as 
the lifeblood of the agency but as a drain on 
the agency's potentially more lucrative under­
takings, and they still prefer to put their 
francs, marks, and pounds toward "useful" 
and "practical" missions such as heavy launch­
ers (rockets), meteorological satellites, and 
communications satellites. For many years, 
indeed, the budget of the Science Programme 
did not increase with inflation; even in 1987, 

382 STACIA E. ZABUSKY 
despite Lust's impassioned rhetoric, science 
missions accounted for only 10 percent of 
ESA's overall budget (Langdon 1989). 
This state of affairs -the disjunction 
between official rhetoric and actual conditions 
-generated feelings of alienation among the 
scientists I knew. Some non-ESA scientists 
talked about ESA as a "black cloud" that hung 
over their heads as they endeavored to make 
an instrument for a space-science satellite. One 
sso scientist grumbled about the way science 
was treated as "a jewel in the crown, for ESA, 
an ornament that the organization used to 
legitimate its choices and its expenditures as 
being "for the good of human kind," without 
matching such rhetorical emphasis with signif­
icant resources. In more cynical terms, another 
sso scientist complained to me that ESA was 
"just a money laundering scheme for govern­
ment and industry," such that it was the needs 
of national industries that drove decisions 
about scientific missions rather than the needs 
of scientists. 
For the scientists, this sense of not being 
where the power was, yet at the same time 
being caJled on to legitimate the capital expen­
ditures of ESA and European states, engendered 
cynicism in spades. Cynicism appeared in 
various guises. Often, it appeared as com­
plaints, whether about daily work practices 
such as those concerning the "pointed brick,'' 
or about the disparity between rhetoric and 
circumstances; these complaints were tem­
pered by a shrug of shoulders, a knowing 
glance, a remark made to the naive ethnogra­
pher that "of course" this is the way it has 
always been: "I'm forty, so I'm more cynical," 
an sso scientist commented wryly during an 
interview. At other times, it appeared as a kind 
of disengagement, as an inability to believe in 
or even dream of possibilities, whether techni­
cal, political, or cultural. For instance, one ESA 
publication made much of the fact that: 
The Agency itself, with its staff and com­
mittees made up of representatives of the 
Member States, constitutes one of the mel.ting 
pots for the material from which Europe is 
gradually being forged, and in which nation­
alist preoccupations have to give way to 
wider, more promising vision. All who 
contribute to the life of the Agency have a 
sense of belonging to a European unity .... 
(Langdon and Guyenne 1984:229) Such romantic imagery was easily and ohen 
countered by sso scientists, who talked about 
the internecine conflict between the various 
member states and their representatives in the 
agency. There were stories about French politi­
cians putting pressure on French scientists to 
vote for the selection of French-led missions. 
There was laughter about the insistence of 
Germany on having German treated as a third 
official language (the two official languages of 
ESA are French and English); several scientists 
remarked to me that the presence of multiple 
languages was evidence of political maneuver­
ings and not of technical cooperation, where 
one language would not only do, but one 
was in fact necessary for successful working 
together . These were not stories of "more 
promising visions" but the weary remarks 
of embattled participants whose ability to 
determine what really mattered was severely 
restricted. 
Discourses of cynicism can be understood 
as cultural expressions of the contradictions 
inherent in transnational processes, contradic­
tions that arise as centers are continually 
undermined and power seems always to 
impinge on people from somewhere else as 
they travel in directions not of their own 
making. The scientists I watched had created 
elaborate space missions that produced trans­
national flows when they were first dreamed 
up as mission scenarios. However , once these 
missions entered into the development process, 
once put in motion, the scientists no longer 
directed the flows themselves, any more than 
the falconer directs the falcon how to fly. 
Instead, they were caught up in powerful 
forces over which they had no control, and 
they struggled, improvised, and complained 
their way to some stable center. 
Dreaming of Freedom in 
the Iron Cage 
The shifting centers that accompany the 
transnational processes of big science and 
European integration produce not only impro­
visation and cynicism but dreams and domi­
nation as well. As participants slip from the 
grip of one source of power, they often -
perhaps inadvertently -assume the mantle of 
power over yet another momentary collection 

ETHNOGRAPHY IN/OF TRANSNATIONAL PROCESSES 383 
of people, people who in turn evade this man­
ifestation of power. The result is that everyone 
feels out of control, pushed and dominated by 
forces that they cannot see and over which 
they have no control. For this reason, scient­
ists working on ESA space-science missions 
dreamed of freedom all the time. Their dreams 
of freedom often took the form of appeals to 
''science" to help them clear out a space where 
they could get something done. These appeals 
depicted a clean and pure science that needed 
to be unfettered and free if it were to lead all 
humanity to the truth. Scientists insisted on 
science's power to transcend the petty and con­
fining details of national, political, economic, 
bureaucratic, and industrial interests. This idea 
of science at times insinuated itself as ideology, 
as a discourse of power that enabled partici­
pants to dominat e others. Yet, at the same 
time, this idea of science subverted the power 
of others and served instead as a discourse of 
resistance that enabled sso scientists to with­
stand domination from others. In this way, the 
interests of capital and state -which science 
was supposed to serve- were carried along by 
the transnational processes of big science and 
European integration and were transformed 
from materials of power to cultural resources 
that participants used to resist those same 
interests. Thus, these improvisations provided 
participants with a measure of freedom. 
Nonetheless, the participa nt's experience 
was not of freedom but of struggle and 
confinement. Although they appeared to be 
working in a privileged world, full of money, 
power, and limitless possibilities, sso scientists 
talked endlessly of constraints, obstacles, and 
impediments to their dreams. For them, the 
forces of big science and European integration 
seemed, on the one hand, to make their work 
possible and, on the other, to lock them in 
prisons -silencing, inhibiting, and oppressive. 
Why, then, continue to work within them? 
Because the scientists at sso, as professionals 
everywhere, were called to their vocation with 
"passionate devotion" (Weber 1946). Most of 
the scientists I knew in sso desperately wanted 
to be scientists, to work in their calling, to dis­
cover truth, to work for the social good. To be 
a scientist was not a choice but a duty; indeed, 
as Weber remarked, "The Puritan wanted to 
work in a calling; we are forced to do so" 
(1958:181). The hegemony of modernity thus forces all of us who work in the modern age 
to want to work, even to need to work, if we 
are to have any identity, any authenticit y, at 
all. The scientists were, thus, trapped by their 
own desires, an outcome Weber saw clearly 
when he wrote that the "cosmos of the modern 
economic order ... determine[sJ the lives of all 
the individuals who are born into [it], with 
irresistible force" (1958:181). The scientists in 
sso struggled every day to find the key to 
unlock this "iron cage" of modernity in which 
they felt themselves trapped, dreaming, as do 
all of us who are so caught, of freedom -from 
constraints, from contamination, from need, 
from power. 
Reflecting 
Doing ethnography in the space of the trans­
national brings one to a confrontation with 
power. How to read that power, however, or 
where to locate it comes down, in the end, to 
a matter of taste or perhaps political prefer­
ences -which, in Pierre Bourdieu's (1984) 
terms, amounts to the same thing. In this 
project I found myself unable to exercise the 
kind of critique of power that seemed called 
for by other scholarly study, in part because I 
could find no steady field in which ro stand 
and from which to exercise such a critique. 
Anthropologists today call for reflexivity 
and show how studies of the Other -the sub­
altern, marginal, non-Western -can and must 
provoke us to reflect on ourselves, our own 
aims, the consequences of our actions. In doing 
so, many of these writers seem to claim for 
themselves a moral status built on suffering, a 
suffering they have not themselves endured, 
bur which those they study or work with have 
endured. I cannot lay claim to such moral 
authority. The people among whom I pursued 
my studies are privileged and powerful com­
pared to the typical subjects of ethnographic 
inquiry -just as I am. Indeed, although at 
times I felt uncomfortable conducting ethno­
graphic research among such an elite stratum 
of an already privileged world, and I wanted 
to distance myself from the seductions of 
power and the complicity of privilege, most of 
the time I felt a kind of familiarity. I felt, 
indeed, that I was looking at myself. My infor­
mants' dreams were my dreams; their desires, 
my desires; their cynicism, my cynicism. As I 

384 STACIA E. ZABUSKY 
rode the gyres with these scientists, watching 
them make their satellites {which fly higher 
than any falcon ever dreamed of flying), I real­
ized that I was trapped as well, trapped in an 
iron cage of my own making, but from which, 
nonetheless, there could be no escape. 
Confronting this reality was profoundly dis­
turbing. By doing ethnography among people 
like me -participants in and producer s of the 
transnational flows of modernity - I was 
forced to the kind of reflexivity for which 
anthropologists of non-Western people have 
argued. In the process, I learned that hege­
mony works on all of us, poor and privileged 
alike, propelling us to think its thoughts, to 
work for its goals -its goals become our goals; 
this is its power. Yet my experience was not 
only of unremitting power and privilege, 
secure at the center overseeing and controlling 
all that went on. As did the scientists, I, too, 
longed to resist those forces that pushed me, 
willy-nil ly, against or even along with my will. 
Hegemony, whether or not it is in our inter­
ests, engenders a desire to escape, to be free. The paradox is that even our dreams (of 
liberation, of equality, and of diversity) are 
formed in the images of this power. Hegemony 
works just so, by making us all desire what it 
claims. The iron cage closes in on us more 
tightly. And yet there are those gyres, those 
unending spirals, catching us up and whisking 
us away to another space. There are those 
improvisations, that playfuln ess, that cynicism 
which dissolves the bars of the prison, even 
if for just a moment. Acknowledging that 
the center has vanished affects ethnographic 
choices. No fields exist but rather something 
less sure, less stable. In the end, at work among 
scientists and engineers in Europe, I recognized 
that there were places and moments when 
moral demands and aspirations emerged from 
the interstices of transnational processes and 
privileges and connected us through what we 
hoped for rather than through what we 
resisted. These are the gyres I prefer to follow 
in the improvisational flight that is ethnogra­
phy in/of transnati onalism. 

Part VIII 
Sensorial Fieldwork 
Antonius C. G. M. Robben 
Ethnographic fieldwork is generally presented in a written text, even though people's 
sensory experience of the world reaches far beyond verbal or written expression. 
This literary bias has resulted in the ethnographic neglect of the senses and the priv­
ileging of writing over other means of representation, such as photography, film, 
and sound recordings. Part VIII gives a sample, too small to our taste, of the ethno­
graphic study of the senses, while adding a final reflexive article on this research 
field. 
The Western classification of the senses into sight, touch, taste, smell, and hearing 
is not universal. For example, the Javanese do not recognize taste, but talking, as 
their fifth sense. Hausa emphasize sight as one sense but have only one word for 
the remaining senses, while some cultures add clairvoyance as a sixth sense (Howes 
and Classen 1991 :257-8). Likewise, the Andaman Islanders perceive and organize 
time and space through an annual cycle of smells and a shifting olfactory landscape, 
while the Amazonian Suya classify their flora and fauna into olfactory classes 
(Classen, Howes, and Synnott 1994:95-1 01, Seeger 1981). Some anthropologists 
have proposed the writing of ethnographies which describe all sensory experiences 
because people construct the world and relate to one another within an integrated 
sensorium (see Howes 1991 ). Furthermore, cultures may combine sensory percep­
tions in unique ways, and even individuals may do so when equipped with the 
synaesthetic ability to taste, smell, or see sounds. The difficulty of conveying the 
senses in a written narrative has drawn anthropology to other media such as pho­
tography, filmmak ing, and sound recording. 
Photography and moving pictures were used by ethnographers soon after they 
were invented. George Catlin took what are believed to be the first ethnographic 
photographs, only six years after the daguerreotype was invented in 1839, and 
Bronislaw Malinowski and Claude Levi-Strauss were avid photographers (Prins 
2004, Levi-Strauss 1995, Young 1998). The first ethnographic film was shot in 1895 
by the French physician-t urned-anthropologist Felix-Louis Regnault. Alfred 
Haddon used film as a recording device during the 1898 Torres Straits expedition, 
and so did Franz Boas among the Kwakiutl (De Brigard 1995). These ethnogra­
phers used pictures and film mainly for reasons of illustration. Gregory Bateson and 
Margaret Mead were perhaps the first to employ photography and film as scientific 

386 PART VIII: SENSORIAL FIELDWORK 
instruments to analyze and interpret cultures. Bateson and Mead had been looking 
for ways to avoid the detachment of a too analytic etic approach and the inacces­
sibility of a too emphatic ernie approach. Furthermore, they were struggling with 
the difficulties of expressing foreign cultural meanings, social practices, and intan­
gible intracultural connections in a scientific (English) language. They took recourse 
to film and photography . The selection from their groundbreaking photo-ethn og­
raphy Balinese Character (Bateson and Mead 1942) demons trates that photographs 
can be more than an aide-memoire for fieldworkers or a pictorial illustration for 
readers. Photographs become the primary causeway into Balinese culture and 
thus organize the data analysis, the written comment ary, and the ethnograph ic 
interpretation. 
The fieldwork approach, for Margaret Mead, consisted of taking notes, and for 
Gregory Bateson, recording on film. This division of labor continued upon their 
return home: Mead wrote the ethnographic interpretation and Bateson the photo­
analysis. Mead's so-called ''running field notes" followed the flow of observation 
and included detailed cross-references to the stills or moving pictures taken by her 
husband. She also kept a diary to record the principal occurrences in the village, 
and showed the footage to the Balinese for further commentary (Jacknis 1988). 
Visual anthropology took flight after Balinese Character with the photoeth nog­
raphy on mortuary rituals in rural Greece by Loring Danforth and Alexander Tsiaras 
(1982), and the ethnographic documentaries by filmmakers such as Robert Gardner, 
Timothy Asch, John Marshall, and Jean Rouch (see Edwards 1992, Hockings 1995, 
Rouch 2003 ). Anthropolo gists soon realized that the visual image is not an accu­
rate registration of reality, as early practitioners believed, but that "raw" photos 
and footage, just like "raw" field notes, are constructions encapsulating the inten­
tion, agency, and objectives of the ethnographer, and thus subject to reinterpr eta­
tion. The finished product is the outcome of an elaborate editing process informed 
by an ethnographic understanding of the culture under study (Heider 1976, Scherer 
1992). 
Balinese Character was more than an experiment in ethnographic representation 
and analysis because of its attention to the senses. Margaret Mead explains in the 
introduction that she and her husband were interested in how pre-contact Balinese 
culture {i.e., before the arrival of Buddhist, Hindu, Christian, and Islamic influences) 
was reproduced and visibly manifested in everyday life. Bateson and Mead were 
under the sway of the American culture-and-personality school, and they believed 
that the study of postures, gestures, and interpersonal communications could 
uncover sedimented cultural features about Balinese personali ty, character, and 
ethos. Their reference to a hyperthyroid epidemic among the population, as if shed­
ding the foreign cultural veneer to reveal some sort of ground plan of Balinese 
culture, fits this assumption. The three series of photographs selected here demon­
strate how learning in Balinese culture is visual rather than verbal, and kinesthetic 
(body learning) instead of disciplina ry. Bateson and Mead pay a great deal of atten­
tion to the cultural significance of nonverbal cues, subtle gestures, postures, the 
bending of joints, and the touching and spatial projection of the body, thus includ­
ing a large part of the Balinese sensorium in their ethnograp hy. 
Paul Stoller and Cheryl Olkes, in their article "The Taste of Ethnographic Things" 
( 1989), taken from Stoller's similarly titled book, show how a research interest in 
the senses opens up a whole new realm of anthropological understanding and inter-

INTRODUGION 387 
pretation. Something as seemingly trivial as serving bad sauce is full of cultural 
meaning and social relevance. In this way, the authors criticize the generalizing and 
objectifying aims of one particular approach in sensorial anthropology which 
removes the senses from people's daily experience, and situates them in a knowable 
social and cultural reality to develop a theory of the Senses, of Smell, Sight, Hearing, 
Touch, and Taste. After a deconstruction of Taste in Western philosophy and anthro­
pology, Stoller and Olkes advocate a "tasteful ethnography" which focuses on sub­
jectivity, sensuality, meaningfulness, authenticity, and dialogic and ironic qualities 
of taste. This melange evokes the lived experience of taste, blending interpretation 
with description, evocation with insight, and representation with sensibility (see also 
Geurts 2002, Rasmussen 1999). 
Stoller and Olkes accomplish such tasteful ethnography by revealing the signifi­
cance of being presented with foul-smelling and foul-tasting sauces by their Songhay 
hosts in Niger. Not poor culinary skill, but sibling rivalry, ethnic tension, distrust, 
resistance to paternal authority, social transgression, a violation of custom, jealousy, 
frustration, and unsatisfactory reciprocity were the backdrop to the bad sauces. 
Hospitality turned into hostility through shameful sauces. Thus, the ethnographers' 
palate .disclosed a new understanding of Songhay representation of domestic and 
fraternal conflict. 
In the 1980s, there was a major shift from the anthropolo gy of music to musical 
anthropol ogy, as Seeger (1987:xiii) has pointed out. The anthropolo gy of music 
studies what music adds to an existing culture (see Merriam 1964), while musical 
· anthropology examines how music creates culture and social life itself. Steven Feld 
has been at the forefront of this shift, and his work is of particular importance to 
sensorial anthropology because of his interest in sound rather than music. In his 
article "Dialogic Editing: Interpreting How Kaluli Read Sound and Sentiment" 
(1987), Feld analyzes the reception of his ethnography Sound and Sentiment (Feld 
1982) by the Kaluli people of Papua New Guinea. This fieldwork encounter 
involved "dialogic editing" in which informants reshape the ethnographer's inter­
pretation of their culture in word, image, or sound. This fieldwork technique is par­
ticularly complex in a society as that of the Kaluli, which does not share our Western 
emphasis on the verbal expression of culture but structures storytelling, aesthetics, 
and sentiment through song and sound. The Kaluli and Feld agreed on the central 
importance of natural and human sounds to Kaluli culture. Nevertheless, Feld orga­
nized his ethnography around the aesthetics of local sentiment in singing and 
weeping, even though the people themselves were more concerned with memorable 
personal experiences than with ethnographic analysis and generalization. 
The translation of English into the Bosavi language spoken by the Kaluli was the 
first dialogic obstacle between Steven Feld and his research participants because the 
word "translation' ' has three local connotations: transformation ("turnaround "), 
exposure ("turnover") and meaning ("underneat hs"). Feld renarrated his ethnog­
raphy by revealing submerged layers of meaning, recounting stories, redescribing 
activities, and reassigning ethnographic illustrations to their original actors. These 
conversations also demonstrated that every ethnography is a narrative construction 
which may not coincide with how people sense and represent their culture. The 
anthropologist is faced with restrictions imposed by publishers and peers with 
regard to length, composition, subject matter, analysis, logic, generalization, and 
theorization that are irrelevant to the people described. 

388 PART VIII: SENSORIAL FIELDWORK 
These representational problems are magnified for sensorial anthropolog y. How 
could an ethnography ever do justice to the cultural prominence of sound in Kaluli 
culture? The Kaluli criticized Feld's ethnographic selections and the omission of 
everyday sounds, such as rain, thunder, and the morning noises of the awakening 
village. Feld resorted therefore to CD recordings. However , reproducing sound as 
a cultural system on CD is just as complicated as producing an ethnography through 
words and musical scores. After his rewarding experience with dialogic editing, Feld 
added dialogic auditing to yield a melange of sounds that tried to evoke within the 
span of one hour the Kaluli experience of their local universe (Feld and Brenneis 
2005). Like Stoller's tasteful ethnography , this approach prompted Feld (1991) to 
make a recording which represented a 24-hour period in the Kaluli village. 
The sensory experience of the natural and social world passes through culture. 
The sensorium fuses physiology with culture in specific forms of classification, 
encoding, social practice, power, agency, and negotiation. This cultural mediation 
of sensory perception is, as Michael Herzfeld (2001) explains in the chapter 
"Senses"' from his book Anthropology: Theoretical Practice in Culture and Society, 
the principal premise of the anthropology of the senses. The sensorium is the prover­
bial hardware which needs cultural software to become meaningful to people and 
allow them to interact. How people look, talk, sound, smell, or touch can influence 
whether they are stigmatized or treated with respect, and whether they are identi­
fied with one social group, communit y, and class or another. 
Michael Herzfeld argues that the Cartesian bias of Western science, namely the 
separation of body (the sensorial domain) and mind (the ideational domain), is the 
principal obstacle to a mature anthropology of the senses. Western culture came to 
regard the mind as the seat of reason, and vision as its principal judge. Science 
became dominat ed by verbal and visual representation, while smell, touch, and taste 
were dismissed as too subjective. This bias became reinforced by the rapid devel­
opment of technology which registered the world through visual means, whether 
in writing and diagrams or in photography and test equipment. We can also add 
Descartes's conviction that knowledge advances through ideas as a second influence, 
thus giving further credence to the superiority of the written word. Herzfeld encour­
ages sensorial fieldworkers to make the study of the entire sensorium indispensab le 
to other domains of ethnographic inquiry, such as economics or politics, in order 
to lift the anthropology of the senses out of its relative isolation. Just as attention 
to gender and reflexivity is now part and parcel of most ethnographic work, so the 
entire range of senses should become of similar concern. The rapid development of 
technical equipment and the declining costs and improved quality of sonic and visual 
reproduction are contributing to visual and musical anthropology in ways that may 
someday also benefit the ethnography of smell and taste. 

