28 
Balinese Character: A 
Photographic Analysis 
Gregory Bateson and Margaret Mead 
Introduction 
The form of presentation used in this mono­
graph is an experimental innovation. During 
the period from 1928 to 1936 we were sepa­
rately engaged in efforts to translate aspects 
of culture never successfully recorded by the 
scientist, although often caught by the artist, 
into some form of communication sufficiently 
clear and sufficiently unequivocal to satisfy 
the requirements of scientific enquiry. 
"Comjng of Age in Samoa," "Growing up in 
New Guinea,, and "Sex and Temperament" 1 
all attempted to commun icate those intangible 
aspects of culture which had been vaguely 
referred to as its ethos. As no precise scientific 
vocabulary was available, the ordinary English 
words were used, with all their weight of cul­
turally limited connotations, in an attempt to 
describe the way in which the emotional life of 
these various South Sea peoples was organized 
in culturally standardiz ed forms. This method 
had many serious limitations: it transgressed 
the canons of precise and operational scientific 
exposition proper to science; it was far too 
dependent upon idiosyncratic factors of style 
and literary skill; it was difficult to duplicate; 
and it was difficult to evaluate. Most serious of all, we know this about the 
relationship between culture and verbal con­
cepts -that the words which one culture has 
invested with meaning are by the very accu­
racy of their cultural fit, singularly inappro­
priate as vehicles for precise comment upon 
another culture. Many anthropologists have 
been so impressed with this verbal inadequacy 
that they have attempted to sharpen their 
comment upon other cultures by very exten­
sive borrowing from the native language. This 
procedure, however, in addition to being 
clumsy and forbidding, does not solve the 
problem, because the only method of transla­
tion available to make the native terms finally 
intelligjble is still the use of our own culturally 
limited language. Attempts to substitute terms 
of cross-cultural validity, while they have 
been reasonably successful in the field of 
social organization, have proved exceedingly 
unsatisfactory when finer shades of cultural 
meaning were attempted. 
Parallel with these attempts to rely upon 
ordinary English as a vehicle, the approach 
discussed in "Naven"2 was being developed ­
an approach which sought to take the pro­
blem one step further by demonstrating how 
such categories as ethos, there defined as .. a 
Gregory Bateson and Margaret Mead, pp. xi-xvi, 49-51, 13-17, 84-90, and Plates 15-17 from Gregory 
Bateson and Margaret Mead, Balinese Character: A Photographic Analysis (New York: New York Academy 
of Sciences, 1942). Copyright, 1942, by The New York Academy of Sciences. 

390 GREGORY BATESON AND MARGARET MEAD 
culturally standardized system of organization 
of the instincts and emotions of individuals," 
were not classifications of items of behavior 
but were abstractions which could be applied 
systematically to all items of behavior . 
The first method has been criticized as jour­
nalistic -as an arbitrary selection of highly 
colored cases to illustrate types of behavior so 
alien to the reader that he continues to regard 
them as incredible. The second method was 
branded as too analytical -as neglecting the 
phenomena of a culture in order to intellectu­
alize and schematize it. The first method was 
accused of being so synthetic that it became 
fiction, the second of being so analytic that 
it became disembodied methodological 
discussion. 
In this monograph we are attempting a new 
method of stating the intangible relationships 
among different types of culturally standard­
ized behavior by placing side by side mutually. 
relevant photographs. Pieces of behavior , spa­
tially and contextually separated - a trance 
dancer being carried in procession, a man 
looking up at an aeroplane, a servant greeting 
his master in a play, the painting of a dream -
may all be relevant to a single discussion; the 
same emotional thread may run through 
them. To present them together in words, it is 
necessary either to resort to devices which are 
inevitably literary, or to dissect the living 
scenes so that only desiccated items remain. 
By the use of photographs, the wholeness of 
each piece of behavior can be preserved, while 
the special cross-referencing desired can be 
obtained by placing the series of photographs 
on the same page. It is possible to avoid the 
artificial construction of a scene at which a 
man, watching a dance, also looks up at an 
aeroplane and has a dream; it is also possible 
to avoid diagramming the single element in 
these scenes which we wish to stress -the 
importance of levels in Balinese inter-personal 
relationships - in such a way that the reality 
of the scenes themselves is destroyed. 
This is not a book about Balinese custom, but 
about the Balinese -about the way in which 
they, as living persons, moving, standing, 
eating, sleeping, dancing, and going into trance, 
embody that abstraction which (after we have 
abstracted it) we technically call culture. We are interested in the steps by which 
workers in a new science solve piecemeal their 
problems of description and analysis, and in 
the relationship between what we now say 
about Balinese culture, with these new tech­
niques, and what we have said with more 
imperfect means of communication about 
other cultures. A particular method of presen­
tation has therefore been agreed upon. 
Margaret Mead has written the introductory 
description of Balinese character, which is 
needed to orient the reader so that the plates 
may be meaningful. She has used here the same 
order of vocabulary and the same verbal 
devices which have been made to do service in 
earlier descriptions of other cultures. Gregory 
Bateson will apply to the behavior depicted in 
the photographs the same sort of verbal analy­
sis which he applied to his records of Iatmul 
transvestitism in "Naven,"' and the reader 
will have the photographic presentation itself 
to unite and carry further these two partial 
methods of describing the ethos of the 
Balinese. 
Former students of Bali have approached 
Balinese culture as peripheral to and derivative 
from the higher cultures of India, China, and 
Java, carefully identifying in Bali the reduced 
and residual forms of the heroes of the Rama­
jana or of the Hindoo pantheon, or of the 
characters of the Chinese theater. All those 
items of Balinese culture which could not be 
assimilated to this picture of Asiatic diffusion 
have been variously classified as "Polynesian," 
"Indonesian," "animistic," or "'Bali aga" (a 
term which some Balinese have learned to use 
in contradistinction to "Bali Hindoe"). We, 
however, always approached the material 
from the opposite point of view; we assumed 
that Bali had a cultural base upon which 
various intrusive elements had been progres­
sively grafted over the centuries, and that the 
more rewarding approach would be to study 
this base first. We accordingly selected for our 
primary study a mountain village� Bajoeng 
Gede, near Kintamani in the District of Bangli, 
where most of the conspicuous elements of the 
later, intrusive culture were lacking. In Bajoeng 
Gede one does not find use of Hindoo names 
for the Gods, the importance of color in rela­
tion to direction in offerings, cremation, caste, 

BALINESE CHARACTER 391 
the taboo upon eating beef, or any relation­
ship to a Brahman priestly household. Writing 
there was, but only a half-dozen semi-literate 
individuals who were barely able to keep 
records of attendance, fines, etc. The village 
boasted one calendrical expert who was skilled 
enough to advise the village officials on the 
intricacies of the calendar of multiple inter­
locking weeks and "months." Furthermore, 
Bajoeng Gede was ceremonially bare, even 
compared with other Balinese mountain vil­
lages. These was a minimum of that redu­
plication and over-elaboration of art and 
ceremon ialism which is such a marked 
characteristic of Balinese culture. Reliance on 
the calendar and complication of offerings 
and rites de passage were all reduced to a 
meager and skeletal minimum - a minimum 
which would nevertheless seem highly 
complex in comparison with most of the 
known cultures of the world. In this locality, 
it was possible in the course of a year to get a 
systematic understanding of the ground plan 
of the culture. 
This undertaking was facilitated by two cir­
cumstances: the population of Bajoeng Gede 
suffered from a pronounced thyroid condition, 
with about 15 per cent of the population 
showing various degrees of simple goiter; and 
the whole population was markedly slow both 
in intellectual response and in speed of bodily 
movement. These circumstances, which are 
no doubt interrelated, provided us with a com­
munity in which the cultural emphases were 
schematically simplified, and upon our under­
standing of this base it was possible to graft -
as the Balinese had before us -an under­
standing of the more complex versions of the 
same essential forms which we encountered on 
the plains. (It is important to remember that 
Hindoo culture came by way of Java, where 
the culture was related to that of Bali, and that 
most of the elements probably reached Bali in 
a partially assimila ted form, already somewhat 
adapted to Balinese emphases and social 
structures.) 
After an initial two months of exploration 
and work on the language in Oeboed (district 
of Gianjar), we selected Bajoeng Gede, and we 
worked there with only a few short absences 
from June 1936 to June 1937 and intermit-tently till February 1938. In November 1936, 
we established a second camp in Bangli in a 
palace built by a former Rajah, from which we 
were able during various short stays to partic­
ipate in the family ceremonies of the ruling 
caste of Bangli. Finally in 1937, we built a 
pavilion in the courtyard of a Buddhistic 
Brahman family in the village of Batoean, from 
which position we participated in and studied 
Brahman family life, simultaneously collecting 
the work and studying the personality of the 
large group of Brahman and casteless painters 
in the school of art which had sprung up in 
Batoean during the last ten years. 
Through Miss Belo's work in Sajan, a 
peasant plains village dominated by feudal 
Kesatrya nobles; Mrs Mershon's work in 
Sanoer, a coastal fishing village consisting 
mainly of Sivaistic Brahmans and casteless 
people; and from material provided by our 
Balinese secretary who came from a rising 
casteless family in Singaradja, the Dutch 
capital in North Bali, we were able to gather 
various sorts of comparative materials to 
round out the picture of Balinese culture which 
we had developed on the basis of observations 
in Bajoeng Gede. The discussions of Balinese 
culture in this book are based on these experi­
ences, and on short excursions by ourselves 
and our collaborators to other villages and 
cities in Bali. 
It is true that every village in Bali differs 
from every other in many conspicuous 
respects, and that there are even more striking 
differences between districts, so that no single 
concrete statement about Bali is true of all of 
Bali, and any negative statement about Bali 
must be made with the greatest caution. But 
through this diversity there runs a common 
ethos, whether one is observing the home of 
the highest caste, the Brahman, or of the 
simplest mountain peasant. The Brahman's 
greater ease, due to the fact that there are 
fewer of those who know much more than he, 
is but another version of the peasant's unwill­
ingness to commit himself, of his ••test I err, 
being an illiterate man." The most conspicu­
ous exceptions to this common ethos are the 
culture of the ruling caste, the Kesatryas, and 
the culture of North Bali which has been 
exposed to strong foreign influences during the 

392 GREGORY BATESON AND MARGARET MEAD 
last sixty years. In both of these groups may 
be found an emphasis upon the individual 
rather than upon his status, an element of 
social climbing and an uneasiness of tenure 
which contrast strongly with the rest of Bali. 
For this reason, reference to these two groups, 
except for occasional bits of ceremonial which 
they hold in common with the rest of Bali, has 
been excluded from this discussion. 
In the Plates, each single illustration is dated 
and placed, and it is not safe to generalize from 
its detailed content for other parts of Bali. The 
form, however, the ethological emphasis which 
is implicit, may be taken to apply to all those 
parts of Bali of which we have any knowl­
edge, except for North Bali, the Kesatryas, and 
the Vesias, a lower caste which mimics the 
Kesarryas and upon which we did very little 
work. These groups we explicitly exclude and 
we avoid all detailed negative statements as 
such statements are virtually impossible to. 
make about a culture which has found it pos­
sible to combine such extraordinarily diver­
gent content with such a consistent ethological 
emphasis. There is no apparent difference in 
the character structure of the people in vill­
ages where trance is shared by all and those in 
villages where no one ever goes into trance; 
people in villages where every other woman is 
believed to be a witch and those in villages 
where no one is believed to be a witch. In most 
of the cultures of which we have systematic 
knowledge, such matters are intricately and 
inextricably part of the personality of every 
participant member of the culture, but in Bali 
the same attitude of mind, the same system of 
posture and gesture, seems able to operate 
with these great contrasts in content with 
virtually no alteration in form. So also for 
climatic contrasts, and contrasts in wealth 
and poverty: the mountain people are dirtier, 
slower, and more suspicious than the plains 
people; the poor are more frightened than the 
rich, but the differences are in degree only; the 
same types of dirtiness, of suspicion, and 
anxiety are common at all levels. 
This volume is in no sense a complete 
account of Balinese culture, even in its most 
general outlines. It is an attempt to present, at 
this time when scientific presentations are 
likely to be widely spaced, those aspects of our 
results and those methods of research which we have judged most likely to be of immedi­
ate use to other students. A less pregnant 
period of history might have dictated another 
choice of subject matter for our first presenta­
tion. Balinese culture, even that of Bajoeng 
Gede, is very rich and complex, and our two 
years' work, with two American collabor ators 
and three Balinese secretaries, can only claim 
to be a "sampling" of the Balinese scene. We 
attempted to make systematic samples of 
village organization, calendrical ceremonial 
and rites de passage, trance, painting, carving, 
the shadow-play puppets, death rituals, and 
child behavior , so as to provide a series of 
crosscutting pictures of the culture which 
could be fitted together and cross checked 
against each other. The discussion which 
follows is a synthetic statement based upon 
these various samples; the photographs are a 
carefully selected series, analyzed on the basis 
of the same sampling. 
Finally a word about the relevance of such 
researches to the period of history in which we 
find ourselves. Balinese culture is in many ways 
less like our own than any other which has yet 
been recorded. It is also a culture in which the 
ordinary adjustment of the individual approx­
imates in form the sort of maladju stment 
which, in our own cultural setting, we call 
schizoid. As the toll of dementia praecox 
among our own population continues to rise, 
it becomes increasingly important for us to 
know the bases in childhood experience which 
predispose to this condition, and we need to 
know how such predisposition can be cultur­
ally handled, so that it does not become 
maladjustment. 
Meanwhile, we are faced with the problem 
of building a new world; we have to reorient 
the old values of many contrasting and con­
tradictory cultural systems into a new form 
which will use but transcend them all, draw on 
their respective strengths and allow for their 
respective weaknesses. We have to build a 
culture richer and more rewarding than any 
that the world has ever seen. This can only be 
done through a disciplined science of human 
relations and such a science is built by drawing 
out from very detailed, concrete material s, 
such as these, the relevant abstractions -the 
vocabulary which will help us to plan an inte­
grated world. 

BALINESE CHARACTER 393 
Notes on the Photographs 
and Captions 
Taking the photographs 
... We tried to use the still and the moving­
picture cameras to get a record of Balinese 
behavior, and this is a very different matter 
from the preparation of "documentary" film 
or photographs. We tried to shoot what 
happened normally and spontaneously , rather 
than to decide upon the norms and then get 
Balinese to go through these behaviors in suit­
able lighting. We treated the cameras in the 
field as recording instruments, not as devices 
for illustrating our theses. 
Four factors may be mentioned which con­
tributed to diminish camera consciousness in 
our subjects: 
A. The very large number of photographs 
taken. In two years we took about 25,000 
Leica stills and about 22,000 feet of 16 mm. 
film, and it is almost impossible to maintain 
camera consciousness after the first dozen 
shots. 
B. The fact that we never asked to take 
pictures, but just took them as a matter of 
routine, wearing or carrying the two cameras 
day in and day out, so that the photographer 
himself ceased to be camera conscious. 
C. We habitually directed attention to our 
photographing of small babies, and the par­
ents overlooked the fact that they also were 
included in the pictures (as even American 
parents will, in similar circumstances). 
D. We occasionally used an angular view 
finder for shots when the subject might be 
expected to dislike being photographed at that 
particular moment. 
\Y/e usually worked together, Margaret 
Mead keeping verbal notes on the behavior 
and Gregory Bateson moving around in and 
out of the scene with the two cameras. The 
verbal record included frequent notes on the 
time and occasional notes on the photogra­
pher's movements, such as the direction from 
which he was working and which instrument 
he was using. Whenever a new roll of film was 
inserted in the camera, the date and time of 
insertion were scribbled on the leader; and 
when the film was removed, the dare and time were again recorded, so that the film could be 
accurately fitted to the notes. 
For work of this sort it is essential to have 
at least two workers in close cooperation. 
The photographic sequence is almost valueless 
without a verbal account of what occurred, 
and it is not possible to take full notes while 
manipulating cameras. The photographer , 
with his eye glued to a view finder and moving 
about, gets a very imperfect view of what is 
actually happening, and Margaret Mead (who 
is able to write with only an occasional glance 
at her notebook) had a much fuller view of the 
scene than Gregory Bateson. She was able to 
do some very necessary directing of the pho­
tography, calling the photographer' s arrenrion 
to one or another child or to some special play 
which was beginning on the other side of the 
yard. Occasional ly, when we were working 
on famjly scenes, we were accompanied by 
our native secretary, I Made Kaler . He 
would engage in ethnographic interviews with 
the parents, or take verbatim notes on the 
conversarwns. 
In a great many instances, we created the 
context in which the notes and photographs 
were taken, e.g., by paying for the dance, 
or asking a mother to delay the bathing of 
her child until the sun was high, but this 1s 
very different from posing the photographs. 
Payment for theatrical performances is the eco­
nomic base upon which the Balinese theater 
depends, and the extra emphasis given to the 
baby served to diminish the mother's aware­
ness that she was to be photographed. A visit 
"to photograph the baby being bathed" would 
last from fifteen minutes to two hours, and the 
greater part of the time after the bathing would 
be spent watching the family in a large variety 
of types of play other behavior. In such a 
setting, a roll of Leica film (about 40 expo­
sures) lasted from five to fifteen minutes. 
Selection of photographs 
Selection of data must occur in any scientific 
recording and exposition, but it is important 
that the principles of selection be stared. In the 
field, we were guided first by certain major 
assumptions, e.g., that parent-child relation­
ships and relationships between siblings are 
likely to be more rewarding than agricultural 

394 GREGORY BATESON AND MARGARET MEAD 
techniques. We therefore selected especially 
contexts and sequences of this sort. We 
recorded as fully as possible what happened 
while we were in the houseyard, and it is so 
hard to predict behavior that it was scarcely 
possible to select particular postures or ges­
tures for photographic recording. In general, 
we found that any attempt to select for special 
details was fatal, and that the best results were 
obtained when the photography was most 
rapid and almost random .... 
One rather curious type of selection did 
occur. We were compelled to economize on 
motion-picture film , and disregarding the 
future difficulties of exposition, we assumed 
that the still photography and the motion­
picture film together would constitute our 
record of behavior. We therefore reserved the 
motion-picture camera for the more active and 
interesting moments, and recorded the slower 
and less significant behaviors with the still 
camera. The present book is illustrated solely 
by photographs taken with the latter, and as a 
result, the book contains no photograph of 
a father suckling his child at the nipple, and 
the series of kris dancers leaves much to be 
desired. 
After taking the photographs, a further 
selection occurred. On returning to America, 
we had the entire collection of 25,000 frames 
printed as diapositives on strips of positive 
film , and in planning this book we made a list 
of categories which we intended to illustrate -
a list similar to, but not identical with, the 
grouping of the plates in the table of Contents. 
We then projected all the diapositives, one by 
one, and wrote category cards for those which 
seemed to merit further consideration for 
inclusion in the book. We thus obtained a list 
of about 6,000 frames. Of these, we enlarged 
approximately the fust 4,000 in chronological 
order, desisting at this point because time was 
short. From these 4,000, the majority of the 
prints reproduced here were selected, and we 
only drew upon the later negatives for a few 
special points which were not represented in 
the earlier series. The book thus contains a dis­
proportionate number of photographs taken 
in the first three-qua rters of our time in Bali. 
The final choice of photographs for each 
plate was in terms of relevance, photographic 
quality, and size. In a number of cases, rele-vance to a problem is necessarily two-sided; 
there would be some photographs making one 
half of a psychological generalization, and 
others making a converse or obverse point. In 
these cases, we have tried to arrange the pho­
tographs so that most of the plate is occupied 
with the more typical aspect, while a statement 
of the obverse is given by one or two pho­
tographs at the bottom (usually in the right­
hand corner) of the plate. In other cases, it has 
seemed worth-while to devote two plates to the 
contrasting aspects of the same generalization. 
Conflict between scientific relevance and 
photographic merit has usually been easily 
settled in favor of the former, and a large 
number of pictures have been included in spite 
of photographic faults. Selection by size was 
more distressing. Each plate was to be repro­
duced as a unit and therefore we had the task 
of preparing prints which would fit together in 
laying out the plate. Working with this large 
collection of negatives, it was not possible to 
plan the lay-out in advance, and therefore, in 
the case of the more important photographs, 
two prints of different sizes were prepared. 
Even with this precaution, the purely physical 
problems of space and composition on the 
plate have eliminat ed a few photographs 
which we would have liked to include. 
Learning (Plates 15 to 17) 
When the Balinese baby is born, the midwife, 
even at the moment of lifting him in her arms, 
will put words in his mouth, commenting, "I 
am just a poor little newborn baby, and I don't 
know how to talk properly, but I am very 
grateful to you, honorable people, who have 
entered this pig sty of a house to see me born." 
And from that moment, all through babyhood, 
the child is fitted into a frame of behavior, of 
imputed speech and imputed thought and 
complex gesture, far beyond his skill and 
maturity. The first rime that he answers 
"Tiang," the self-subordinating ego pronoun, 
to a stranger, he will be echoing a word that 
has already been said, on his behalf and in his 
hearing, hundreds of times. Where the Ameri­
can mother attempts to get the child to parrot 
simple courtesy phrases, the Balinese mother 
simply recites them, glibly, in the first person, 
and the child finally slips into speech, as into 

BALINESE CHARACTER 395 
an old garment, worn before, but fitted on by 
another hand. 
As with speech, so with posture and gesture. 
The right hand must be distinguished from the 
left; the right hand touches food, and the right 
thumb may be used in pointing; the left hand 
is the hand with which one cleanses oneself, or 
protects one's genitals in bathing, and must 
never be used to touch food, to point, or to 
receive a gift. But the Balinese mother or nurse 
carries a child, either in or out of a sling, on 
her left hip, thus leaving her own right hand 
free. In this position, the baby's left arm is free, 
while the right is frequently pinioned in 
against the breast, or at best extended behind 
the mother's back. Natural ly, when a baby is 
offered a flower or a bit of cake, it reaches for 
it with the free left hand, and the mother or 
the child nurse invariably pulls the left hand 
back, extricates the baby's right hand-usually 
limp and motiveless under this interference 
with the free gesture -and extends the right 
hand to receive the gift. This training is begun 
long before the child is able to learn the dis­
tinction, begun in fact as soon as the child is 
able to grasp at a proffered object, and dis­
continued usually when the child is off the hip. 
A three-year-old may often err and receive a 
casual present in his left hand, with no more 
punishment than to have some older child or 
nearby adult shout "Noenas!" ("Ask!") which 
means "Cup the right hand in the left," but 
the baby of four months is permitted no such 
leeway. Over and over again, the first sponta­
neous gesture is clipped off, and a passive, 
plastic gesture is substituted. 
Meanwhile, the child in the sling, or sup­
ported lightly on the carrier's hip, has learned 
to accommodate itself passively to the carrier's 
movements; to sleep, with head swaying grog­
gily from side to side, as the carrier pounds 
rice; or to hang limp on the hip of a small girl 
who is playing "crack-the- whip." Surrender­
ing all autonomy, and passively following the 
words spoken in its name or the rhythm of 
the person who carries it or the hand which 
snatches its hand back from a spontaneous 
gesture, the child's body becomes more waxy 
and flexible as it grows older; and gestures 
which are all echoes of an experienced pattern 
replace such spontaneous gestures of infancy 
as the pounding of the child's silver bracelets on any convenient board. This accommoda­
tion to the movements of others, to cues that 
come from a pattern rather than from a desire, 
is facilitated by the extent to which a Balinese 
child is carried. There is a strong objection to 
letting a child be seen crawling -an animal 
activity -by any but the family intimates; and 
babies, even after they are able to crawl and 
toddle, are still carried most of the time. The 
position on the hip limits spontaneity to the 
arms and the carrier's repetitive interference 
with hand gestures reduces it there. 
Even at its 105-day birthday, the infant is 
dressed in full adult costume. The infant boy 
is seated in a parent's arms, and a headcloth 
ten times too large for him is arranged at 
least for a moment on his head. The infant's 
hands are put through the gestures of prayer, 
of receiving holy water, and of wafting the 
essence of the holy offering toward himself. By 
the 21 0-day birthday , the child will repeat 
these gestures himself, sitting dreamily , after 
the ceremony, clasping and unclasping his tiny 
hands, and then speculatively examining them, 
finger by finger. At this age also, before he can 
walk, he will be taught simple hand dance 
gestures, first by manual manipulation, and 
later he will learn to follow visual cues, as the 
parent hums the familiar music and gestures 
before the baby's eyes with his own hand. This 
situation, the child dancing in the sustaining 
arm of the parent and that arm vibrating 
rhythmically to the music, becomes the proto­
type of Balinese learning in which as he grows 
older he will learn with his eyes and with his 
muscles. But the learning with the eyes is never 
separated from a sort of physical identification 
with the model. The baby girl climbs down off 
her mother's hip to lift a bit of an offering to 
her head, when her mother or elder sister does 
the same. 
Learning to walk, learning the first appro­
priate gestures of playing musical instruments, 
learning ro eat, and to dance are all accom­
plished with the teacher behind the pupil, con­
veying directly by pressure, and almost always 
with a minimum of words, the gesture to be 
performed. Under such a system of learning, 
one can only learn if one is completely relaxed 
and if will and consciousness as we understand 
those terms are almost in abeyance. The flexi­
ble body of the dancing pupil is twisted and 

396 GREGORY BATESON AND MARGARET MEAD 
turned in the teacher's hands; teacher and 
pupil go through the proper gesture, then 
suddenly the teacher springs aside, leaving 
the pupil to continue the pattern to which he 
has surrendered himself, sometimes with the 
teacher continuing it so that the pupiJ can 
watch him as he dances. Learning with the eyes 
flows directly from learning passively while 
ont>'s own body is being manipulated by 
another. 
The Balinese learn virtually nothing from 
verbal instruction and most Balinese adults are 
incapable of following out the three consecu­
tive orders which we regard as the sign of a 
normal three-year-old intelligence. The only 
way in which it is possible to give complex 
verbal instructions is to pause after each detail 
and let the listener repeat the detail, feeling his 
way into the instruction. Thus all orders tend 
to have a pattern like this ... You know the 
box?" "What box?" "The black one." "What 
black one?" "The black one in the east corner 
of the kitchen." "In the east corner?" "Yes, the 
black one. Go and get it." "I should go and 
get the black box in the east corner of the 
kitchen?" "Yes." Only by such laborious 
assimilation of words into word gestures 
made by oneself, do words come to have any 
meaning for action. 
This same peculiar ity is found in the pattern 
of story telling. The Balinese story teller does 
not continue gaily along through a long take, 
as the story tellers of most cultures do, but 
he makes a simple statement, "There was once 
a princess," to which his auditors answer, 
"Where did she live?" or "What was her 
name?" and so on, until the narrative has been 
commun icated in dialogue. A thread, even a 
simple verbal thread, in which one's body 
plays no role, has no continuous meaning. 
There is rarely any discernible relationship 
between the conversation of a group of Balinese 
and the activity which they are performing. 
Words must be captured and repeated to have 
meaning for action, but there is no need at all 
to translate action into words. One might listen 
at a spy hole for an hour to a busy group, 
hearing every word spoken, and be no wiser in 
the end as to whether they were making offer­
ings, or painting pictures, or cooking a meal. 
The occasional "Give me that!" is interspersed 
with bits of comic opera, skits and caricatures, songs and punning and repartee. As Amer icans 
doodle on a piece of paper while attending to 
the words of a lecture, so the Balinese doodles 
in words, while his body flawlessly and quickly 
attends to the job in hand. 
AU learning in Bali depends upon some 
measure of identification, and we may consider 
as prototype of such learning, the child's con­
tinuous adaptation to movements into which 
it is guided by the parent who holds it. Lacking 
such identification, no learning will occur, and 
this becomes specially conspicuous when one 
attempts to teach a Balinese some new foreign 
technique. Most Balinese will balk and make 
no attempt to copy a European, or perform 
any act, no matter how simple, which only a 
European has been seen to perform. But if once 
one can persuade one Balinese to master a 
European skiJI, then other Balinese of the same 
or superior caste position will learn it very 
quickly. So in training our Balinese secretaries, 
we had no difficulty because I Made Kaler, our 
secretary, educated in Java, believed that he 
could do what Europeans did, just as he could 
speak their language, sit on their chairs and 
handle their tools. Other Balinese boys, seeing 
Made Kaler use a typewriter, learned to type 
accurately and well in a few days. 
This particularistic identification with the 
movement and skill of other bodies, socially 
comparable to one's own, has undoubtedly 
served as a conservative element in Bali, 
maintaining the division of labor between the 
sexes, and partially limiting certain skills, like 
writing, to the high castes. Only by invoking 
some such explanation can we understand 
the division of labor in Bali. The system works 
smoothly and accurately but with a total 
absence of sanctions. In the few cases of 
women who become scholars or musicians, or 
men who become skilled in weaving, no one 
even bothers to comment on the odd circum­
stance. And those who cross the sex division 
of labor are not penalized; they are not 
regarded as more or less masculine or feminine 
nor confused with the occasional transvestite, 
although the latter includes the occupations of 
the opposite sex in his transvesticism. But 
without sanctions, with freedom to embrace 
any occupation, ninety-nine out of a hundred 
Balinese adhere simply to the conventions that 
spinning, weaving, making most offerings, 

BALJNESE CHARACTER 397 
etc., are women's work, whereas carving, 
painting, music, making certain other offer­
ings, etc., are men' s work. 
Combined with this kinaesthetic type of 
learning and with the continuous insistence 
upon levels and directions, there is a preoccu­
pation with balance, which expressed itself in 
various ways. When the young male child is 
still learning to walk, loss of balance or any 
other failure evokes a regular response: be 
immediately clutches at his penis, and often, to 
be sure of balance, walks holding on to it. 
Little girls clasp their arms in front of them, 
and sometimes hold on to their heads. As they 
grow older, an increased sense of balance 
makes it possible to stand motionless for quite 
a long time on one foot; but dancing on one 
foot, playing too freely with a preciously 
achieved and highly developed balance is asso­
ciated with witches and demons. Just as in 
witchcraft, right and left are reversed, so also 
in witchcraf t, the decent boundaries of body 
posture are trespassed upon. Balinese children, especially little Balinese 
girls, spend a great deal of time playing with 
the joints of their fingers, experimenting with 
bending them back until the finger lies almost 
parallel with the back of the hand. The more 
coordinated and disciplined the motion of the 
body becomes, the smaller the muscle groups 
with which a Balinese operates. Where an 
American or a New Guinea native will involve 
almost every muscle in his body to pick up a 
pin, the Balinese merely uses the muscles 
immediately relevant to the act, leaving the rest 
of the body undisturbed. Total involvement in 
any activity occurs in trance and in children's 
tantrums, but for the rest, an act is not per­
formed by the whole body. The involved 
muscle does not draw all the others into a 
unified act, but smoothly and simply, a few 
small units are moved -the fingers alone, the 
hand and forearm alone, or the eyes alone, as 
in the characteristic Balinese habit of slewing 
the eyes to one side without turning the 
head. 

398 GREGORY BATESON AND MARGARET MEAD 
Plate 15 Visual and 
Kinaesthetic Learning I 
An individual' s character structure, his atti­
tudes toward himself and his interpretations of 
experience are conditioned not only by what 
he learns, but also by the methods of his learn­
ing. If he is brought up in habits of rote learn­
ing, his character will be profoundly different 
from what would result from habits of learn­
ing by insight. Among the Balinese, learning is very rarely 
dependent upon verbal teaching. Instead, the 
methods of learning are visual and kinaes­
thetic. The pupil either watches some other 
individual perform the act or he is made to 
perform the act by the teacher who holds his 
limbs and moves them correctly . During this 
process the pupil is entirely limp and appears 
to exhibit no resistant muscular tensions. A 
Balinese hand, if you hold it and manipul ate 
the fingers, is perfectly limp like the hand of a 
monkey or of a corpse. 
1, 2, and 3. Learning to carry on the head. These three photographs were all taken on the same 
occasion and show a girl (fig. 2) preparing to go home from a temple feast, carrying on her head 
the offerings which her family sent to the ceremony . Figs. 1 and 3 show two smaller girls imitat­
ing her and so beginning to participate in the ceremonial life of the village. 
Fig. 1, I Djani; fig. 2, I Maderi (unrelated); fig. 3, I Djana (younger sister of I Djani). 
Bajoeng Gede. June 23, 1937. 11 Z 30, 2·6, 33. 
4 and 5. A father teaches his son to dance, humming a tune and posturing with his hand. ln the 
first picture, the father shapes his facial expression to a typical dance smile and the son looks at 
the raised hand. In the second picture, the son tries to grasp the arm, and the father's expression 
becomes inter-personal instead of stylized. 
Nang Oera, the father; I Karba, the son, aged 265 days. 
Bajoeng Gede. Oct, 1, 1936, 2 U 30, 31. 
6. The same father teaches his son to play the xylophone. 
Nang Oera; I Karba, aged 393 days. 
Bajoeng Gede. Feb. 5, 1937. 4 S 1. 
7. A child nurse teaches the same baby to walk. She holds the baby by the upper part of the arms. 
There was no baby in her household and she spent a great part of her time looking after her 
father's step-brother's child. This photograph of learning to walk was taken five months later than 
the photographs of the same child learning to dance. 
I Djeben teaching I Karba, aged 414 days. 
Bajoeng Gede. March 26, 1937. 6 F 15. 
8. Small high-caste boys learning ro draw in the sand. The boy in the center was the most skilled 
and the others stopped their own drawing to watch him. All three boys show the typical Balinese 
high kinaesthetic awareness in the hands, and this is heightened by their using very small twigs 
for their drawing. 
I. B. Saboeh; I Dewa Moeklen; I Dewa Loepiah. 
Batoean. Oct. 5, 1937. 16 M 2. 

BALINESE CHARACTER 399 

400 GREGORY BATESON AND MARGARET MEAD 
Plate 16 Visual and 
Kinaesthetic Learning II 
Teaching by muscular rote in which the pupil 
is made to perform the correct movements is 
most strikingly developed in the dancing 
lesson. 
Mario of Tabanan, the teacher in this 
sequence, is the dancer chiefly responsible for 
the ev.olution of the kebiar dance which has 
become very popular in Bali in the last twenty 
years. The dance is performed sitting in a 
square space surrounded by the instruments 
of the orchestra, but though the principal emphasis is upon the head and hands, the 
dance involves the whole body, and Mario has 
introduced a great deal of virtuosity into the 
difficult feat of rapid locomotion without 
rising from the sitting position. The chief faults 
in the pupil's dancing are that he dances only 
with his head and arms, and does not show the 
disharmonic tensions characteristic of the 
dance. 
This sequence of photographs illustrates two 
essential points in Balinese character forma­
tion. From his dancing lesson, the pupil lear ns 
passivity, and he acquires a separate awareness 
in the different parts of the body. 
1. The pupil dances alone while Mario watches in the background. Note the imperfect develop­
ment of the pupil's finger posture. 
2. Mario comes forward to show the pupil how it should be danced. 
3. Mario urges the pupil to straighten up the small of his back. Note that this instruction is given 
by gesture rather than by words. 
4. Mario's hand position and facial expression while demonstrating. 
5. Mario takes the pupil by the wrists and swings him across the dancing space. 
6. Mario makes his pupil dance correctly by holding his hands and forcing him to move as he 
should. Note that Mario is actually dancing in this photograph, and that he postures with his 
fingers even while holding the pupil's hands. The position of Mario's left elbow in these pho­
tographs is characteristic of the tensions developed in this dance. 
7. Mario even assumes the conventional sweet impersonal smile of the dancer while he moves 
the pupil's arms and holds the pupil tightly between his knees to correct his tendency to bend the 
small of his back. 
8. Mario again tries to correct the pupil's tendency to bend his back. 
I Mario of Tabanan reaching I Dewa P. Djaja of Kedere. 
Tabanan. Dec. 1, 1936. 3 0 11, 13, 14, 17, 21, 22, 23, 25. 

1 
e 
s 
s 
e BALINESE CHARACTER 401 
1 
2 
3 
4 

402 GREGORY BATESON AND MARGARET MEAD 
Plate 17 Balanc e 
Plates 15 and 16 taken together give us indi­
cations about the Balinese body image. We 
have, on the one hand, the fantasy of the 
inverted body with its head on the pubes; and 
on the other, the Balinese methods of learning 
through their muscles, the discrepant muscu­
lar tensions which are characteristic of their dancing, and the independent movement and 
posturing of the separate fingers in dance. We 
have, in fact, a double series of motifs -indi­
cations that the body is a single unit as per­
fectly integrated as any single organ, and 
contrasting indications that the body is made 
up of separate parts, each of which is as per­
fectly integrated as the whole. 
This plate illustrates the motif of the per­
fectly integrated body image. 
1 and 2. A small boy learns to stand and walk. His father has set up for him in the houseyard a 
horizontal bamboo supported on two posts (penegtegan). The boy learns to walk by using this 
as a support. 
The topology of this arrangement is the precise opposite of that of the play-pen of Western 
culture. The Western child is confined within restricting limits and would like to escape from 
them; the Balinese child is supported within a central area and is frightened of departure from 
this support. 
In fig. 2, when unsure of his balance, he holds onto his penis. This method of reassurance is 
common in Balinese baby boys. 
I Karba, aged 414 days; I Kenjoen, his cousin, aged 317 days, behind him. 
Bajoeng Gede. March 26, 1937. 6 F 20, 21. 
3. A baby girl unsure of her balance. She clasps her hands in front of her abdomen. 
I Kangoen. 
Bajoeng Gede. April 21, 1937. 7 A 15. 
4. A child nurse picks a baby from the ground. Note the straightness of the small of the back 
and the resulting emphasis on the buttocks. 
I Njantel picks up I Karba; I Dani watches. 
Bajoeng Gede. May 13, 1937. 8 U 30. 
5. A girl stoops to pick up part of an offering. The flexibility of the body and the emphasis on 
the buttocks continue into later life, and occur even in those who are unusually heavily built. 
l Teboes; 1 Tjerita behind her. 
Bajoeng Gede. April 26, 1937. 7 H 18. 
6. Decorative panel on a temple wall. This figure stands as one of a series of representations of 
transformed witches (/ejak) and graveyard spirits (tangan-tangan, njapoepoe, etc., cf. Pl. 20, fig. 5). 
Poera Dalem, Bangli. Nov. 23, 1936. 3 J 5. 
7. A small boy scratches his leg. He was waiting in the road, uncertain whether his playmate was 
following. His natural movement is to raise his leg, rather than to stoop. 
Bajoeng Gede. April 19, 1937. 6 W 19. 
8 and 9. Paintings of a woman transforming herself into a witch (anak mereh). She goes out alone 
at night, sets up a little shrine and makes offerings on the ground to the demons. She dances 
before the shrine with her left foot on a fowl, and becomes transformed into supernatural size 
and shape. The fantasy that the body is as integrated as a single organ is here danced out in 
grotesque balance, and leads to a nightmare transformation or ecstatic dissociation of the per­
sonality. The drawings illustrate the close association between grotesque posture and the ecstasy 
of witchcraf t (cf. figs. 6 and 7). 
Paintings by I. B. Nj. Tjeta of Batoean. 
Purchased Feb. 2, 19 38. Reduced x 1/3 linear. Cat. Nos. 545 and 548. 

. BALINESE CHARACTER 403 

