31 
Senses 
Michael Herzfeld 
Common Sense, 
Body Sense 
Anthropology, like all academic disciplines, is 
primarily a verbal activity. Even the study of 
visual media must always be expressed in 
words. Recent attempts to introduce pictorial 
represen tations of human movement (notably 
Williams 1991; Williams, ed., 1997; Farnell 
1995) suggest the inadequacy of this Carte­
sian commitment. We have seen already that 
modern representa tional practices are heavily 
dependent on visual formats, but even this 
restriction seems to appear most commonly 
as an extension of verbal te:\."ts. A diagram 
without a caption would not be easily under­
stood. In consequence of this bias built into the 
preferred modes of represenration, the role of 
smell and hearing, not to speak of touch, has 
been grossly under-represented. Can suffering, 
the theme of the previous chapter, be under­
stood without reference to sensation? Espe­
cially in this chapter and in the chapter on 
aesthetics, I shall try to suggest paths along 
which anthrop ologists have been trying for 
some years now to rectify this pervasive 
absence. 
The technical difficulries of recording smell 
and taste are formidable, and have certainly 
inhibited progress. Much of the work even on 
the significance of gesture must proceed through verbal responses to visual cues (e.g., 
Cowan 1990). The possibility of knowing 
""what something smells like" to a member of 
one's own culture is remote; when we add the 
further problem of cross-cultural translation. 
the difficulties may seem to be insurmounrable, 
especially given the intractability to analysis of 
psychological inner states. It is nevertheless 
encouraging that a few scholars have begun to 
broach an "anthropology of the senses·· -
although I would Laution that this label nsks 
marginalizing, as yet one more specialist 
concern, what really ought to be a central 
concern for the comparative study of cultures 
and societies. 
The fundamental premise underlying the 
concept of an "anrhropology of the senses·· is 
that sensory perception is a cultural as well as 
a physical act: sight. hearing. touch, taste. and 
smell are not only means of apprehending 
physical phenomena bur are also avenues for 
the transmission of cultural values. \XIhile the 
most obvious domains for this process may he 
the performing arts, it is also an inregral part 
of social relations: smell. for example, creates 
social boundaries, not because some smells are 
naturally bad, bur because they are culturally 
constituted as such. (lf one considers the 
radical difference between most Southeast 
Asians' enthusiastic response to the smell ot 
the durian fruit in conrrast to the disgust it 
Michael Herzfeld, .. Senses," pp. 240-53 from Michael Herzfeld. Anthropology: Theoretical Prucl1ce "' 
Culture and Societv (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2001 ). 0 200 l by UNESCO. 

432 MICHAEL HERZFELD 
evokes from most Europeans, for example, it 
becomes immediately apparent that smell is as 
culturally relative as aesthetic judgment.) This 
realization is an extension, rarely recognized as 
such, of Mary Douglas's famous insight that 
"dirt" is a matter of cultural categories rather 
than of biological fact (Douglas 1966), as is 
indeed suggested by the association of the less 
recordable senses with concepts of pollution 
and cleanliness - a bad smell, a disgusting 
sound, a slimy touch. 
Like the notion of order that defines dirt, the 
experience of the senses is calibrated to the 
"common sense" -to the accepted range of 
what is "self-evident" (Douglas 1975) -in 
any given society. In this regard, the study of 
the senses is remarkably like that of, say, 
economies: it is resistant to such anthropolo g­
ical relativization because this relativization 
threatens the security of our own uncon­
sciously cherished perceptions and thus -espe­
cially-of the idea of a transcendent "common 
sense." Indeed, the etymological splitting of 
terms like "sense" and "taste" into two 
streams-the cerebral and the sensual-is diag­
nostic of the extent to which Cartesian and 
even earlier western assumptions about the 
separation of body from mind have taken hold 
of our consciousness. 
This chapter should be read in close associ­
ation with the chapter on aesthetics. The very 
term "aesthetics" is derived from a Greek root 
connoting the subjective perception of feeling. 
In the West this category is freely extended to 
the auditory domain: music is especially 
prominent here. Yet this term, too, is restricted 
in its applications by particular cultural defin­
itions of the sensorium. The addition of 
taste and smell is rare, half-humorous (calling 
a chef an "artist" has all the metaphorical 
ring of artifice), and confined to relatively 
few domains. Perhaps the commodification of 
visual art offers a clue here: given the economic 
significan ce of collecting as well as the heavy 
investment in monumentality made by nation­
states, the difficulty of recording smell and 
taste in some reproducible and reasonably 
durable medium has marginaliz ed these senses 
more than any other except touch - which, 
because it is primarily dyadic and thus rela­
tively private, generally escapes social analysis 
altogether . An Anthropology of 
the Senses? 
In recent years, anthropo logists concerned 
with the restrictive understanding of the 
phenomenal world that is possible using the 
conventional descriptive instruments of an 
academic discipline, have begun to explore 
new approaches. Some of these approaches 
are inspired by phenomenology (e.g., Jackson 
1989), some by growing awareness of domi­
nant medical paradigms of embodiment 
(Desjarlais 1992; Kleinman and Kleinman 
1994), some by the realization that historical 
knowledge may as easily be embodied as 
objectified (Connerton 1989; Seremetakis 
1991, 1993), and some by a focus on the incul­
cation of social knowledge by nonverbal 
means (Coy 1989; Kondo 1990; Jenkins 
1994). The contribution from medical anthro­
pology is potentially perhaps the most radical, 
because this field tackles the Cartesian para­
digm at source -in the body itself. 
A few anthropologists, moreover , have 
bravely tackled the whole gamut of "the 
senses" as a key topic for the discipline. 
Among these, C. Nadia Seremetakis (ed., 
1994) and Paul Stoller (1989) have offered us 
exercises in reflexive exploration. Others, 
notably a group of Canadian scholars includ­
ing Constance Classen (whose work is central 
to this chapter), have attempted to synthesize 
a comparative "anthropology of the senses." 
This is an important departure. It places the 
sensual in systematic analytic focus for virtu­
ally the first time, and it substitutes method­
ological challenges for vague assertions. 
It also, however , inevitably raises the usual 
difficulty associated with the invention of 
any new "anthropology-of" formulation. The 
small number of scholars so far engaged in this 
enterprise suggests, above all, the risk that the 
senses - other than those already dominant -
will remain marginal to ethnographic descrip­
tion unless, in some practical fashion, all of 
anthropology can be recognized as necessarily 
shot through with alertness to the entire gamut 
of sensory semiosis. I use the term "semiosis" 
rather than "perception'' here advisedly, for I 
wish to signal the importance of recognizing 
that what this new development offers is a 

SENSES 
specifically social, as opposed to psychologi­
cal, assessment of how the various senses are 
used. 
Finally, I suggest that another risk is tha� 
of simply developing a catalogue of cases. 
As a new awareness of the centrality of the 
sensory emerges, some of this is undoubt edly 
inevitable, and indeed may constitute a neces­
sary precondition for "resensitizing" the disci­
pline. That said, however , a slight intimation 
of strain may appear as this chapter pro­
gresses, for my own intention -which is surely 
not ultimately at odds with Classen's -is not 
so much to list all the exciting new areas in 
which we can explore sensory semiosis, but 
to think about how this might affect other 
domains of anthropological investigation. We 
can ask, for example, how considerations of 
smell might affect economic relations (a gift 
that smells wrong may indeed be poisoned, 
metaphorically or otherwise); how the nose 
often provides a means of ethnic, class, and 
even professional classification in ways that 
subvert the explicit social ideology of a culture; 
or how the physical discipline of the body 
through intensely boring and uncomfortable 
posture may not only incu lcate artisanal con­
formity and obedience but provide space for 
silent mutiny and a reallocation of loyalties. 
Here again, I would emphasize the probable 
future contribution of what has already been 
done in medical anthropolo gy, where the issue 
is no longer simply one of recognizing that 
culture mediates experience but has become a 
focus on how such mediation is negotiated and 
modulated through actual changes in the social 
sphere. An excessive focus on static "cultures" 
resists this insight; in this chapter, I shall 
attempt to reverse that flow, and so to suggest 
some linkages that would not necessarily 
accrue to an anthropology of the senses nar­
rowly conceived. 
The senses are arenas of agency. Thus, the 
view that perception is conditioned by culture, 
while unexceptionable in itself, does not 
suffice. Not only do the ways in which people 
perceive the world vary as cultures vary, but 
indeed they also vary within cultures; they are 
negotiated. Yet it is certainly useful to begin 
with the local understanding of what actually 
can be sensed and how. As Classen has shown, 
perhaps the most surprising realization is the 433 
fact that even the enumeration of the senses 
may vary. Within western history we find, 
aside from the customary grouping into five 
senses, enumerations of four, six or seven 
senses described at different periods by differ­
ent persons. Thus, for example, taste and 
touch are sometimes grouped together as one 
sense, and touch is sometimes divided into 
several senses (Classen 1993a: 2-3). Similar 
variations in the enumeration of the senses can 
be found in non-western cultures. Ian Ritchie 
writes that the Hausa of Nigeria, for example, 
recognize two general senses: visual perception 
and nonvisual perception (Ritchie 1991: 195). 
Such basic differences in the divisions of the 
sensorium recognized in different cultures 
suggest the extent to which sensation is cul­
tural as much as it is physiological. 
Scholars who are interested in the cultural 
patterning of sensation report a wide variety 
of kinds of meaning attributed to various 
kinds of sensory experience. The senses them­
selves may be linked with different trains of 
associations, and certain senses rank higher in 
value than others. The elaborate attention paid 
to both sight and taste in the Chinese kitchen, 
for example, may contrast with the Balkan 
preference for uncompli cated tastes and fre­
quent indifference to the visual appearance of 
the food. The predominance of particular 
senses in symbolism also varies a great deal: 
smell, for example, is nowadays either neutral 
or slightly negative in North American culture 
unless the reverse is specified -as it may have 
to be in any attempt to generalize about "the 
Western sensorium," because in an older 
western tradition the "odor of sanctity,'' often 
marked by the attractive smell of the corpse of 
a saintly person, was held in high esteem. 
Christian mystical tradition, for example, is 
characterized by a strict asceticism of the body 
coupled with a rich sensuality of the spirit, 
whereby the divine is conceptualized and 
mystically experienced through a wealth of 
sensory symbols. Nonetheless, today we are 
more likely to say of an idea that it stinks, or 
that a scheme smells fishy, than to praise it as 
"smelling of roses" (although this, too, may 
happen). And a North American might regard 
as eccentric the behavior of a tough Greek man 
of military service age who plucks a flower in 
order to savor its smell, and then rolls a single 

434 MICHAEL HERZFELD 
word around in his mouth with obvious 
sensual relish, not because its referential 
meaning is remarkable, but because he wishes 
to share his pleasure in the pure sound of it -
a revealing reversal of what we so often con­
sider to be the "real" value of speech. (It may 
also be significant in this connection that the 
Greek term noi"ma, literally a "meaningful­
ness," is usually understood to mean a some­
what covert gesture that would actually be 
betrayed by the act of speaking, especially in 
the kind of pretentious way that such a gesture 
can be used to mock: real, social meaning 
inheres in action, not grandiose verbiage.) 
All these examples suggest that bodily sen­
sation and cultural value are mutually engaged 
at all rimes. Our task is to explore, not only 
the variety of such associations, but also their 
consequences for the whole range of social 
relations and acts. Social codes determine what 
constitutes acceptable sensory behavior and 
indicate what different sensory experiences 
mean. To stare at someone may signify rude­
ness, curiosity, flattery, or domination, de­
pending on the circumstances and the culture. 
Downcast eyes, in tum, may suggest modesty, 
fear, contemplation, or inattention. And these 
are simply the possibilities for cultural coding, 
within which personal idiosyncrasies rna y 
produce further variation in the meanings 
intended -and attributed to a particular 
posture. Yet relatively little of this makes its 
way into ethnographic writing. When it does, 
this is often because the explicit exegesis of 
knowledgeable informants has legitimated it­
made it "real." 
Classen points our that the association 
between sensory faculties and kinds of 
meaning is surprisingly varied. Sight may be 
linked to reason or to witchcraft, taste may be 
used as a metaphor for aesthetic discrirrUna­
tion or for sexual experience, an odor may 
signify sanctity or sin, political power or social 
exclusion. Together, these sensory meanings 
and values form the sensory model espoused ­
more or less consistently -by the members of 
a society. This is what it means to say that 
people "make sense" of the world. Classen 
acknowledges the likelihood of challenges to 
this model from within the society -from 
"'persons and groups who differ on certain 
sensory values" -but, in accordance with the respect for indigenous theories enjoined in this 
book, we would agree on insisting that there 
is usually a central paradigm to be debated 
' 
negotiated, or simply -if differentiall y _ 
experienced. 
Three Assumptions 
Challenged 
Classen notes three prevalent assumptions 
that have impeded our understanding of the 
cultural construction of sense. (She herself 
describes that understanding as "an alternative 
approach to the study of culture," which sug­
gests that one might still be able to conceive 
that an anthropology not fully responsive to 
the role of the senses could still offer a per­
suasive interpretation of some aspects of social 
life.) These assumptions are: that the senses are 
"windows on the world," or in other words 
transparent in nature, and therefore are precul­
tural; that the most important sense is the 
visual; and that a more acceptable alternative 
to this "visualism" is the recasting of knowl­
edge -especially about nonliterate societies -
as verbal, and specifically as oraUaural. 
We experience our bodies -and the world -
through our senses, which we apprehend on 
the basis of the codes we have learned. The 
normative sensory model of a society thus 
reveals the expectations placed on individual 
understanding, and points up important 
aspects of its internal organization. For 
example, the gradual European abandonm ent 
of smell and increasing emphasis on vision is 
directly linked to the technologies of literacy 
and to the expansion of social relations 
beyond the face-to-face that these made 
possible. 
To address the first assumption briefly, 
then, the view of the senses as "windows on 
the world'' is a misleading metaphor . Unlike 
windows, the senses are not transparent. They 
are, rather, heavily encoded instruments that 
translate bodily experience into culturally rec­
ognizable forms. They thus frame and mediate 
perceptual experience in accordance with a 
balance of personal idiosyncrasy and socially 
prescribed norms. And even the idiosyncratic 
dimensions are variations on cultural themes. 
Two individuals in a given culture may not 

SENSES 
enjoy the same foods, yet they will express 
their respective preferences in terms of a set of 
preconceived categories. For examples, con­
trary to western stereotypes, not all Thais 
adore spicy food (although some may "justify" 
their blander tastes, which are also a claim on 
higher social status, by wryly attributing it to 
their Chinese ancestry !), yet the ''quality" of 
the food will be debated in terms of agreed­
upon notions of balance, freshness, and so 
forth. A Greek restaurateur I know excoriated 
a distinguished habitue of his restaurant for 
demanding that the spaghetti be cooked soft; 
the gentleman in question, a sophisticated 
traveler, complained about the "hard" pasta he 
had encountered in Italy, where locals usually 
insist that it should not be cooked beyond the 
roughness they call a/ dente (literally, ''for the 
tooth"). Where mutually hostile cultures abut 
each other, we may even find systemic discor­
dance within a larger common code. In the 
Balkans, for example, Greeks view with deep 
ambivalence certain Turkish dishes that 
combine the sweet fruitiness of raisins with 
meat or yoghurt or add more spice than 
Greeks usually enjoy; the ambivalence 
expresses both the historical awareness of a 
cultural debt and the ideology of their own cul­
tural superiorit y. And individual Greeks will 
position themselv es very differently between 
the two extremes, sometimes varying their 
stance according to the social context (prefer­
ring, for example, to affect a "European" pref­
erence for blandness in a restaurant but 
demanding more spice at home). Note here 
how sensory experience intersects with perfor­
mance and context. 
The second assumption that has impeded 
the development of an anthropology of the 
senses is the idea that, in terms of cultural sig­
nificance, sight is the only sense of major 
importance. This assumption reflects a western 
bias that associates vision with reason. Aristo­
tle, for example, considered sight to be the 
most highly developed of the senses. However, 
while vision was usually considered the first 
and most important of the senses, it was still 
the "first among equals" (Classen 1993a: 3-4; 
Synnott 1991 ). More than that, Classen has 
emphasized, sight has become "something of a 
sensory despot," leaving little play to the other 
senses in the imagination. As we have also seen 435 
in other chapters, this visualist bias has dra­
matically influenced the way in which anthro­
pology itself has evolved. Thus, one emergent 
and potentially very important aid to the refo­
cusing of the discipline lies in attending to 
kinds of knowle dge that have proved resistant 
to being coded in graphic or visual ways. 
Ironically, the third problem arises precisely 
from the work of certain scholars who have 
challenged the hegemony of sight in cultural 
studies. These academics have suggested 
replacing or supplementing visual models of 
interpretation with models based on speech 
and aurality. Marshall McLuhan ( 1962) and 
Walter Ong (1967), notably, argued that the 
sensory model of a society is determined by its 
technologies of communication. According to 
this theory, literate -particularly print-based -
societies emphasize sight because of the visual 
nature of writing, while nonliterate societies 
emphasize hearing because of the auditory 
nature of speech. For the latter, consequently , 
the notion of a "world harmony" is more 
appropriate than that of a "world view" (Ong 
1969). 
Classen objects, rightly, that "while such 
approaches have helped prepare the ground 
for an anthropology of the senses by propos­
ing alternate sensory paradigms for the study 
of culture, they have one major drawback 
from the perspective of sensory anthropolo gy. 
This drawback IS that they do not allow for 
sufficient variation in sensory models across 
cultures." Just as we should not typecast a 
society by one particular kinship mode 
(Salzman 1978: 66) or one particular mode 
of subsistence (Netting 1982: 286), so "the 
sensory combinatories of culture are much too 
complex to be stereotyped as either auditory 
or visual according to the dominant mode of 
communic ation." The oral culture of the Hopi 
of Arizona, for example, places an emphasis 
on sensations of vibration, while that of the 
Desana of Colombia highlights the symbolic 
importance of color (Classen 1993a: 11, 
131-4 ). Moreover , the oral-literate model 
assumes that societies that give priority to sight 
(preeminently the West) will be analytic, while 
those that emphasize hearing will be synthetic. 
Classen rightly opposes this view -"The vision 
which is deemed rational and analytical in the 
West ... may be associated with irrationality 

436 MICHAEL HERZFELD 
in another society, or with the dynamic 
fluidity of colour" -and calls instead for 
"culturally-specific investigations of particular 
sensory orders." In fact, as Derrida (1976) 
mischievously noted in his famous critique of 
Levi-Strauss, the absence of what westerners 
mean by writing does not necessarily mean, 
and empirically does not mean, the absence of 
"graphological" representation -and hence of 
a visual orientation. Indeed, we might add that 
the whole distinction between oral and literate 
cultures is highly prejudicial, for it all too 
easily creates an aesthetic hierarchy in which 
"oral literature" and "oral poetry" are 
absorbed into the canon of western written 
forms as lesser or "archaic" versions. This, 
indeed, is what happened in the history of 
European folklore studies. 
Such biases reflect the extraordinary persis­
tence of evolutionism in both popular and 
scholarly thinking in the West. The reluctance 
of present-day anthropo logists to examine or 
recognize the cultural importance of smell, 
taste, and touch is due not only to the relative 
marginalization of these senses in the modern 
West, but also to the racist tendencies of an 
earlier anthropology to associate the "lower" 
senses with the "lower" races. As sight, and to 
a lesser extent hearing, were deemed the pre­
dominant senses of "civilized" westerners, 
smell, taste and touch were assumed to pre­
dominate among "primitive" non-westerners. 
Many early scholars were interested in 
depicting the "animalistic" importance of 
smell, taste, and touch in non-western cultures. 
This trend is already evident and widespread 
in eighteenth-century aesthetics: "as long as 
man is still a savage he enjoys by means of 
I the] tactile senses l i.e., touch, taste and 
smell]," rather than through the "higher" 
senses of sight and hearing (Schiller 1982: 
195). Where Linnaeus in the seventeenth 
century had associated different human popu­
lations with different forms of dress, thereby 
yoking together supposed levels of governabil­
iry with equivalent levels of bodily restraint 
that were sartorially expressed (Hodgen 
1964), an eighteenth-century "authority" on 
African slaves stated that their "faculties of 
smell are truly bestial, nor less their commerce 
with the other sexes; in these acts they are 
as libidinous and shameless as monkeys" (Edward Long, cited by Pieterse 1992: 41). In 
the early nineteenth century the natural histo­
rian Lorenz Oken postulated a sensory hierar­
chy of human races, with the European 
"eye-man" at the top, followed by the Asian 
"ear-man", the Native American "nose-man", 
the Australian "tongue- man", and the African 
"skin-man" (Gould 1985: 204-5). In this 
setting, the anthropologist Charles Myers was 
surprised to find when he set out to explore 
the importance of smell among the inhabitants 
of the Torres Straits at the turn of the twenti­
eth century that "the people of the Torres 
Straits have much the same liking and dislik­
ing for various odours as obtains among 
ourselves" (Myers 1903: 185). Nonethele ss, 
Myers suggested that the strong power of evo­
cation which odours held for the Islanders 
provided "yet another expression of the high 
degree to which the sensory side of mental life 
[as opposed to the rational side] is elaborated 
among primitive peoples" (Myers 1903: 184). 
Senses and Systematic 
Knowledge 
In its pursuit of a middle ground, as we have 
seen, anthropology has steered a course 
between several pairs of extremes. Among 
these is the opposition between generaliz ation 
and particularism -Radcliffe-Brown' s (1952) 
"nomothetic" and "idiographic" methods, 
respectively. The centrist position here is that 
of a heuristic approach -a probing that takes 
nothing for granted, but that remains firmly 
committed to ethnogra phic analysis. In the 
study of the senses, however, the discipline has 
perhaps been relatively slow to move away 
from gross generalizations, both because of the 
weight of its own Cartesian philosophical her­
itage and because the technological limits to 
investigation have seemed too daunting. While 
few would voice sentiments like those of 
Edward Long or even Charles Myers today, 
there has been little systematic field investiga­
tion of the ways in which meanings are 
invested in and conveyed through each of the 
senses. But a few pioneers have opened the 
way. Once free of the intellectualist prejudice 
against smell, taste, and touch as "animal" 
senses, the fact that the Sereer Ndut of SenegaJ 

SENSES 
have a complex olfactory vocabulary (Dupire 
1987) or that the TzotziJ of Mexico describe 
the cosmos in thermal terms (Gossen 1974) no 
longer appears a telltale mark of usavagery" 
but bespeaks a sophisticated cultural elabora­
tion of a specific sensory domain. Conversely , 
it also draws attention to the role of these 
neglected senses in societies, such as those of 
the anthropologists themselves, in which they 
have receded into the background -for they 
have not disappeared altogether. Indeed, the 
prominent recognition of the evocative 
powers of a "Proustian, moment of taste or 
smelJ awaits only the full emergence of what 
is already a nascent acknowledgment of the 
importance of evocation itself. A "smellscape" 
may encapsuJate collective local histories as 
well as personal pasts. But there is a practical 
reluctance on the part of scholars to engage 
with what their recording equipment cannot 
fix in time and space. An anthropology that 
refuses to admit the significance of what it 
lacks the technical means to measure or 
describe would nevertheless be a poor empiri­
cal discipline indeed. 
Parenthetically, it is worth making the point 
that both sight and writing are directly associ­
ated with power -and often with dangerous, 
alien, and intrusive power-in many societies, 
including those just mentioned. The anthro­
pologist's role as a recorder of facts, and the 
frequent assumption that the anthropologist is 
engaged in espionage or police surveillance, 
largely spring from this perception. The ever­
increasing domination of the world by a few 
industrial nations usually intensifies that asso­
ciation. Thus, it is a maner of political as well 
as epistemological urgency for the discipline to 
become much more sensitive to the messages 
couched in alternative sensory codes. 
Groundwork in the Field 
A number of different people have been influ­
ential in the development of the anthropology 
of the senses (for a fuller account see Classen 
1993a). Those who see themselves as develop­
ing an "anthropology of the senses" acknowl­
edge a debt to the media specialist Marshall 
McLuhan ( 1962, 1964) and his student Walter 
J. Ong (1969, 1982), who as we have seen 437 
were important prototheorists of the anthro­
pology of the senses. Ong's largely undocu­
mented view that, "given sufficient knowledge 
of the sensorium exploited within a culture, 
one could probably define the culture as a 
whole in virtually all its aspects" (1967: 6), 
encouraged other scholars (such as Edmund 
Carpenter [1972, 1973]) to explore the whole 
of the cultural sensorium, despite Ong's own 
restrictive preoccupation with the oral-literate 
distinction. 
Within anthropolo gy, Claude Levi-Strauss 
was inspired by the synaesthetic ideals of the 
nineteenth-century Symbolists to pioneer 
exploration of the sensory codes of myths. In 
the first volume of Mythologiques, in a section 
entitled "Fugue of the Five Senses" {Levi­
Strauss 1969), he traces how oppositions 
between sensations in one modality, such as 
hearing, may be transposed into those of 
another modality, such as taste, and in turn 
related to various conceptual oppositions -
life/death or nature/culture -and to their 
attempted resolution in mythical thought. 
Levi-Strauss did not, however, make the 
transition from analyzing the sensory codes of 
myths to analyzing the sensory codes of culture 
as a whole. His interest, as Classen percep­
tively remarks, "lay more in tracing the oper­
ations of the mind than with analyzing the 
social life of the senses.,, Moreover, in the 
absence of adequate analytic and recording 
technology, the structuralist penchant for 
breaking taste down into ''gustemes" -cultur­
ally significant units of taste -has nor led to 
any new insights, although Goody's ( 1982) 
class-based analysis of the rise of elite cuisines 
has at least proved suggestive and constitutes 
prima facie evidence for the need for further 
research. 
Influenced by both McLuhan and Levi­
Strauss, Anthony Seeger (1975 1981) exam­
ined how the Suya of the Mato Grosso region 
of Brazil classify humans, animals, and plants 
according to their presumed sensory trairs. He 
found, for example, that the Suya character­
ized men as pleasantly bland-smelling, while 
women and children were deemed to be 
unpleasantly strong-smelling. This characteri­
zation is due to the association of men with 
the valued domain of culture, and the associ­
ation of women and children with the suspect 

438 MICHAEL HERZFELD 
domain of nature. Seeger further found the 
Suya to emphasize the social importance of 
speaking and hearing, while linking sight with 
antisocial behavior such as witchcraft -an 
association also made in some European soci­
eties, notably those of the eastern and north­
em Mediterranean (the C4evil eye"), and a good 
illustration of why the visualism of anthro­
pology can be methodologically self-defeating. 
Seeger argued, by contrast, that the impor­
tance of aurality was evident in the lip and ear 
discs worn by Suya men, an instance of body 
decoration serving to remind individuals of the 
proper sensory hierarchy (see further Turner 
1995). 
The influence of Levi-Strauss and McLuhan 
can also be discerned as well in the work of 
the ethnomusicologist Steven Feld ( 1982, 
1986, 1991; Keil and Feld 1994), who exam­
ined the role of sound in the classificatory 
thought and performance art of the Kaluli of 
Papua New Guinea. As with Seeger on the 
Suya, Feld determined that hearing, rather 
than sight, is the sense of greatest cultural 
importance for the Kaluli, providing a model 
for aesthetic expression, social relations, and 
the orchestration of the emotions. Neither 
Seeger nor Feld, however, follows the Ong­
McLuhan ascription of the importance of 
aurality to the fact that the peoples they have 
studied belong to nonliterate cultures. In each 
case, the explanation for the primacy of 
hearing is found within the society in question 
in the form of indigenous theories of meaning. 
It does not spring from a generalized paradigm 
of "'oral cultures" (see also Laderman 1991; 
Roseman 1991; Peek 1994). 
The phrase "the cultural anthropolo gy of 
the senses" was coined by the historian Roy 
Porter in his preface to The Foul and the Fra­
grant: Odor and the French Social Imagina­
tion, by Alain Corbin (Porter 1986). The 
anthropology of the senses did not, however, 
arise as a distinct field until the late 1980s. In 
1989 Paul Stoller, arguing that "anthropolo­
gists should open their senses to the worlds of 
their others," called for the production of 
"tasteful" ethnographies with vivid literary 
descriptions of "the smells, tastes and textures 
of the land, the people, and the food" (1989: 
29). In order for anthropologists to achieve 
this, he cautioned that they must reorient their senses away from the visualism of the West 
and toward the sensory landscapes of other 
cultures (see further Fabian 1983; Tyler 1987). 
In his own work among the Songhay of Niger, 
Paul Stoller explored the importance of such 
aspects of Songhay culture as perfume, sauces, 
and music (Stoller and Olkes 1987; Stoller 
1989, 1995). As regards perfume, for example, 
Stoller describes in rich detail a ceremony by 
which a Songhay woman offers up fragrance 
to the spirits (1989: 128-9). Such descrip­
tion gives the reader a taste of Songhay sensory 
life. 
A similar descriptive or evocative approach 
to the anthropology of the senses has been 
taken by C. Nadia Seremetakis (1991; 1994) 
in her work on Greece. Seremetakis has 
employed multisensory imaging -the taste 
and feel of a peach, the smell and texture of 
grandma's dress-to bring to sensory life her 
memories of childhood in Greece: "The 
grandma sits on a wooden stool. ... Her face 
dark, her hair tied in a bun, her hands freck­
led and rough. The child slips into her lap. It 
is time for fairy tales. Slipping into her lap is 
slipping into a surround of different smells and 
textures, sediments of her work in the fields, 
the kitchen, with the animals" (Seremetakis 
1994: 30). Seremetakis states that her aim in 
undertaking an anthropology of the senses 
is to recover the "often hidden sensory­
perceptual dispositions" of traditional soci­
eties and thereby recover the memory of 
culture embedded in personal recollections and 
material artifacts (1994: x, 9-12). 
In my own work in Greece, I have suggested 
that the evocation of smell has the capacity 
to reproduce historical sequences of much 
longer duration. Describing the 04Smellscape" 
(Herzfeld 1991: 3-4) of a day in the life of a 
Cretan seaside town, I attempted to show how 
the phases of this sensory succession alluded 
to quite different moments in the town's cul­
tural history. While such parallels should nor 
be overdrawn, they also offer the possibility of 
making explicit the often intangib le-seeming 
sources of evocation. They do not speak to, or 
raise, unanswerable questions of intention and 
motive - we may never know whether such 
olfactory associations of times of the day with 
different segments of the larger history are ever 
locally conceptualiz ed as such -but they begin 

SENSES 
ro suggest how and why present-day uses of 
particular substances may acquire the "smell 
of the past" and may consequently generate 
affective associations between images of the 
past and experiences in the present. In this 
sense, the daily sequence of smells may reca­
pitulate, although not necessarily in their orig­
inal order, a succession of smells associated 
roday with different periods, from an agricul­
tural past {warming olive oil), through indus­
trialization (the smoke from motorcycles and 
cars), and on to tourism and the life luxurious 
(colognes and sun tan creams). Such smells can 
also become a domain for competing agencies, 
as when, in that same Cretan town, a house­
wife tries to calculate her neighbors' economic 
condition from the cooking smells emanating 
from their houses. 
At the same time as Stoller, Seremetakis, and 
others were developing an evocative anthro­
pology of the senses in the United States, in 
Canada a group of scholars was exploring 
how an anthropology of the senses might help 
to uncover the symbolic codes by which soci­
eties order and integrate the world. The 
members of this group, based at Concordia 
University in Montrea l, include David Howes 
(1988; Howes, ed., 1991), Anthony Synnott (a 
sociologist) (1991, 1993), Ian Ritchie (1991) 
and Constance Classen (1993a, 1993b). David 
Howes describes the approach of this group: 
"The anthropology of the senses is primarily 
concerned with how the patterning of sense 
experience varies from one culture to the next 
in accordance with the meaning and emphasis 
attached to each of the senses. It is also con­
cerned with tracing the influence such varia­
tions have on forms of social organization, 
conceptions of self and cosmos, the regulation 
of the emotions, and other domains of cultural 
expression ... [lt] is only by developing a rig­
orous awareness of the visual and textual 
biases of the Western episteme that we can 
hope to make sense of how life is lived in other 
cultural senings" (in Howes, ed., 1991: 4). 
Howes has employed this approach to 
examine and compare the sensory models of 
Dobu and Kwoma society in Papua New 
Guinea (Howes 1992) and to explore the elab­
oration of olfactory symbols and rites across 
cultures (Howes, ed., 1991: 128-47; Classen, 
Howes and Synnott 1994 ). In the former work 439 
Howes analyzes the social significance of 
diverse Melanesian sensory practices, such as 
the use of oil to give the body a brilliant shine, 
the employment of scents of mint and ginger 
in love magic, the bobbing motions of the 
dance, and the aural power of names. 
Throughout his writings, the emphasis is on 
tracing the cultural interplay of the senses, as 
opposed to treating a given sense in isolation. 
Classen similarly examines sensory models 
across cultures and in western history. In Inca 
Cosmology and the Human Body ( 1993b), she 
explores the way in which the Incas ordered 
the cosmos and society through sensory 
symbols, and how this order was disrupted 
and reconfigured at the time of the Spanish 
Conquest. In Worlds of Sense ( 199 3a ), a key 
work of reference in this field, she outlined 
the potential breadth of a sensory approach to 
culture by applying it to a range of subjects, 
from the shifts in sensory values which have 
taken place at different periods of western 
history to the diverse sensory priorities of 
various non-western societies. More recently, 
she has examined the historical embodiment of 
gender ideologies through sensory codes such 
as the masculine gaze and the feminine touch 
(Classen 1998). 
Those who situate their work explicitly 
within a self-proclaimed anthropology of the 
senses have cleared a great deal of ground. The 
real rest of their contribution, however , wtll 
not be a simple proliferation of similar studies, 
but systematic ethnographic engagement with 
sensory issues as a maner of course. Some 
hints of things to come have already appeared. 
In his studies of the politics of violence in 
Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia and the United 
States, Feldman ( 1991, 1994) has powerfu lly 
illustrated how the senses may be employed as 
media for political terrorism and for ''cultural 
anesthesia, -the use of sensory techniques 
and technologies to distort and efface instances 
of political violence. Desjarlais ( 1992) has 
explored the sensory aesthetics of pain and 
healing among the Tibetan Yolmo Sherpa in 
order to present an ''embodied" analysis of 
emotional and physical suffering and the ritual 
cures used to treat them. And Taussig focuses 
''understanding mimesis as both the faculty of 
imitation and the deployment of that faculty 
in sensuous knowing, sensuous Or he ring., 

440 MICHAEL HERZFELD 
within European history and Latin American 
colonial and postcolonial culture (1993: 68). 
These three avenues of research illustrate the 
range of subject matter amenable to a sense­
based investigation. It may also be that the 
increased attention of anthropologists to the 
politics of domination has begun to require 
that heightened sensibility to nonverbal and 
nonvisual encodings of experience. The very 
assumption that these other sensory domains 
are somehow closer to nature suggests that 
indeed their use as avenues of indoctrination, 
repression, and incitement in western cultures, 
as well as of alienation, may have been "nat­
uralized'' to the point where their ideological 
charge has become all but "invisible" - a 
telling metaphor in this context! 
Sensing the Future 
The anthropology of the senses has parallels in 
many fields of the social sciences and human­
ities.' Historical data may prove especially 
important: realizing that "our own" sensorium 
has changed is an important first step toward 
decentering what we take to be, as it were, the 
common sensorium. In Europe, for example, 
the decline in the importance of the nonvisual 
senses from the Middle Ages to modernity 
(Classen 1993a) was especially accelerated by 
the development of phorographic technology ­
a technology in which "anything can be sepa­
rated, can be made discontinuous from any­
thing else," as Susan Sontag ( 1978: 22) 
remarks. We can thus see the increasing pre­
dominance of the visual in the European and 
European-domin ated world as enhancing what 
Don Handelman has argued is the basis of the 
bureaucratic state: the power to present, over 
and over again in the form of uniform spec­
tacular performances, the classification of the 
world that best suits the interests of those in 
power. Reciprocal ly, the intended effect of 
visual surveillance -the (literal) supervision 
of rhe spectators -is to drown out awareness 
of messages encoded in the less controllable 
media and senses. While this development rep­
resents the increasing sophistication of visual 
technology, it has occurred at great conceptual 
as well as political cost, so that we are now 
obliged to make extraordinary efforts simply to apprehend all the information that flows 
around us but is not encoded in the print 
media or the ever more exigent assault of tele­
cast images. 
The broad range of applications for a 
sensory analysis of culture indicates that the 
anthropology of the senses need not be only 
a "subfield" within anthropology, but may 
provide a fruitful perspective from which to 
examine many different anthropological con­
cerns. Just as the anthropology of the senses is 
not ahistorical, neither is it apolitical. Indeed, 
the study of sensory symbolism forcefully 
reveals the hierarchies and stereotypes through 
which certain social groups are invested with 
moral and political authority and other groups 
disempowered and condemned. The use of 
skin color as a mark of discrimination is well 
known in many societies. Within the West 
olfactory codes have served to support the 
"fragrant" or "inodorate" elite and stigmatize 
such marginal groups as Jews and blacks. 
Among the Dassanetch of Ethiopia similar 
codes serve to distinguish "superior" cattle 
herders from "lowly" fishermen (Classen 
1993a: 79-105). And exotic cooking smells 
can prompt strong reactions in neighborhoods 
trying to remain ethnically exclusive. 
Sensory codes are likewise employed across 
cultures to express and enforce gender divi­
sions and hierarchies. Anthony Seeger, as 
noted above, for example, has shown how 
the Suya negatively characterize women as 
"strong-smelling'' in relation to "bland­
smelling"' men. Women are furthermore asso­
ciated with disruptive touch by the Suya while 
men are deemed to possess superior powers of 
hearing (Seeger 1981}. In the West, women 
have traditionally been associated with the 
"lower" "sensual' ' realms of touch, taste and 
smell, the realms of the bedroom, the nursery 
and the kitchen. Men, on the other hand, have 
been Linked with the "higher" "intellectual" 
realms of sight and hearing, the sensory 
domains of scholarship, exploration, and gov­
ernment (Classen 1997). 
Issues of politics and gender are penetrated 
with sensory values, as are all issues of impor­
tance to a culture, from religious beliefs and 
practices to the production and exchange of 
goods. With regard to the latter, examples 
include the precautions taken by certain New 

SENSES 
Guinea peoples to avoid offending "the sense 
of smell" of their garden-grown yams (Howes 
1992: 289-90), the ritual exchange of differ­
ently flavored ants (representing different 
moieties) by the Tukano of Colombia (Reichel­
Dolmatoff 1985), and the concern of western 
marketers to imbue their products with exactly 
the right look, feel and taste to appeal to (and 
manipulate) the consu mer's sensory imagina­
tion (Howes, ed., 1996). 
Classen calls for "an increase in the number 
of scholars pursuing a sensory approach to 
culture" and she deduces from the widening 
influence of sensory anthropolo gy that this 
increase is likely to occur. While I share her 
enthusiasm for the topic, I would be more reas-441 
sured by a pervasion of ethnographic writing 
by such interests. In a later chapter dealing 
with Aesthetics, we shall discover that this has 
in fact been happening. But the study of smell 
and taste in particular is still very undeveloped. 
For this, the careful scholarship of the Con­
cordia group and others will be essential, all 
the more so as it increasingly intersects with a 
medical anthropol ogy no longer tied to Carte­
sian models of causation but sensitive to the 
needs of an anthropology that is attuned at 
once, as Michael Jackson ( 1989) and Timothy 
Jenkins (1994) have especially shown, to 
both empirical and phenomenological con­
cerns. The older mode of sense-less description 
indeed now begins to smell rather fishy. 

Part IX 
Reflexive Ethnography 
Antonius C. G. M. Robben 
The postmodern turn of the 1970s heightened anthropolo gy's awareness of the 
epistemology of fieldwork relations, the constitutive position of the researcher , and 
the prevalent styles of ethnographic writing. Reflexiv ity, i.e., the conscious self­
examination of the ethnograph er's interpretive presuppositions, enriched fieldwork 
by making anthropologists pay much closer attention to the interactional processes 
through which they acquired, shared, and transmitted knowledge. It implied a con­
scious reflection on the interpretive nature of fieldwork, the construction of ethno­
graphic authority, the interdependence of ethnographer and informant, and the 
involvement of the ethnographer's self in fieldwork. Reflexivity also prompted an 
interest in narrative styles, because if ethnography was all about intercultural and 
intersubjective translation and construction, then form, style, and rhetoric were of 
central importance (see Clifford and Marcus 1986, Geertz 1988, Ruby 1982, 
Trencher 2000). 
In the excerpt entitled "Fieldwork and Friendship in Morocco," from his book 
Reflectio ns on Fieldwork in Morocco (1977), Paul Rabinow emphasizes that field­
work is an intersubjective construction which relies heavily on the encounter 
between ethnographer and research participant. Anthropology is therefore an inter­
pretive science which necessarily involves an unending search for meaning. Under 
the influence of his mentor Clifford Geertz, Rabinow regards culture as a hetero­
geneous web of meanings spun by people themselves, thus requiring interpretation 
and translation. Such translation is especially crucial during fieldwork in foreign 
cultures. Local people must first make sense of their own culture and then find the 
right discourse to explain it to a foreign ethnographer who lacks any lived experi­
ence in the community under study. Informants situated at the margins of society, 
as was the case for all but one of Rabinow's research participants, are ideal cultural 
interpreters because they have the ability to view several worlds from across the 
social fences that set them apart. 
Rabinow describes Sefrou, an oasis market town in the Middle Atlas Mountains 
of Morocco, through a patchwork of fieldwork relations with a French expatriate, 
five Moroccans located at different places in Sefrou society, and his host ben 
Mohammed, who was positioned firmly in the local communit y. The book describes 
Rabinow' s progressive involvement with these seven key persons from the foreign 

444 PART IX: REFLEXIVE ETHNOGRAPHY 
outsider Richard to the native insider ben Mohammed, from the social periphery 
to the social heart of Sefrou, without privileging the cultural understanding of any 
one of them. Each informant revealed unique aspects of Sefrou society because of 
his social position, opinions, and beliefs. Nonetheless, despite this diversity among 
his informants, Rabinow senses one fundamental divide between him and his 
Moroccan informants: the different pasts, historical traditions, and religious back­
grounds. This awareness opened the way for a deeper intercultural reflection based 
on the acceptance of a fundamental cultural difference between the American ethno­
grapher and the Moroccan research participants. 
Vincent Crapanzano takes the importance of the intersubj ective construction of 
ethnography one step further in his book Tuhami: Portrait of a Moroccan (1980). 
Tuhami was an illiterate tilemaker who lived in a windowless shed near his kiln. 
He was married to a camel-footed demoness, a capricious spirit who controlled his 
love life. Crapanzano met Tuhami through his Berber field assistant Lhacen. The 
three talked every Saturday morning for three to four hours at Lhacen's house for 
nearly eight months. They spoke about women, saints, sexualit y, illness and death, 
tense family relations, the Hamadsha religious brotherhood, and Tuhami's desire to 
free himself from the female jinn (Crapanzano 1980:4-12). 
Tuhami is an experimental ethnography , not an ordinary life history (for a con­
trast, see Du Bois 1944, Lewis 1963, Radin 1963). Crapanzano does not describe 
Tuhami's life in a straightforward manner but is conscious of the dialogic quality 
of the encounter . Strongly influenced by psychoanalysis, Crapanzano has an atten­
tive ear to the self-revelatory meanings behind Tuhami's and his own words, silences, 
dreams, and anxieties, as well as the transferential projection of feelings by Tuhami 
on Crapanzano and the countertransf erential projections by Crapanzano on Tuhami 
provoked by the latter's transferences. The swaying between feelings of similarity 
and dissimilarity among fieldworker and informant demonst rates the shifting nature 
of the ethnographic encounter: there are no fixed social positions or distances. 
The fieldwork relation between Tuhami and Crapanzano began with their radical 
dissimilarity. They were raised in different cultural traditions, had different outlooks 
on life, and held a different sense of agency. These differences were reinforced by a 
universal need for social classification that transforms each unique individual into 
a representative of a particular culture, ethnicity, religion, profession, gender, age 
group, morality, or personality type. These typifications intervene in any meeting 
between two persons, and so also between anthropolo gist and research participant. 
The awareness of this dissimilarity is unsettling and can lead to culture shock. The 
researcher is jolted between times of holding on tenaciously to his or her cultural 
identity and rimes when the many human similarities with the informants are 
emphasized. Crapanzano became worried about his personal emotional involvement 
with Tuhami because it hindered the dialectic of empathy and detachment advo­
cated by conventional anthropo logy. His field assistant Lhacen came to the rescue. 
His presence gave a dynamic instability to their triadic relations, allowing for con­
tinued redefinition and renegotiation. This emotional rollercoaster led to mutual 
understanding and self-knowled ge by detour of the Other. The ethnography about 
Tuhami, the bedeviled Moroccan tilemaker, thus became a narrative of the contin­
uously changing and entwining intersubjective relations among anthropo logist, field 
assistant, and informant in which each held back when the similarities became too 
uncomfortable. 

INTRODUC TION 445 
In the selection "The Way Things Are Said," from her book Deadly Words: Witch­
craft in the Bocage (1980), Jeanne Favret-Saada suggests that only a complete sur­
render to the discourse of her interlocutors allowed her to understand witchcraf t in 
western France. People in the Bocage suspect witchcraf t after suffering a series of 
unusual misfortunes. The victim approaches doctors, therapists, priests, and even­
tually unwitchers who, each from their own branch of knowledge, interpret the 
tragic events and recommend a cure. The unwitcher acknow ledges witchcraft as the 
principal cause, traces the victim's soft spots, and identifies the witch through 
harmful words uttered in the past. The unwitcher turns those deadly words around, 
directs them against the witch, positions himself or herself between witch and victim, 
and seals the victim's weak spots. 
Favret-Saada argues that the only way to understand witchcraf t in the Bocage 
was to accept the position of an unwitcher. A detached objectivist stance (as taken 
by French folklorists), an apprenticeship (recommended by anthropologists), a 
verbal translation (employed by Rabinow), or even a dialogic exchange (practiced 
by Crapanzano}, would all fall short. Favret-Saada was faced with a body of liter­
ature that dismissed Bocage witchcraft as a superstitious belief, an exotic anachro­
nism in modern France, an example of the peasants' pre-logical backwardness, and 
their inability to distinguish cause and effect. The classic ethnography Witchcraft, 
Oracles, and Magic among the Azande comes to mind but, unlike Evans-Pritchard 
(1968}, Favret-Saada was not out to prove that the Bocage peasants were in full 
possession of their rational faculties, despite their belief in witchcraft. Instead, 
she argues, witchcraf t did not exist in some esoteric knowledge or secret spells 
but in the harmful words spoken by a witch or an unwitcher. There was no 
template beyond the words themselves. Words were power. Therefore, know­
ledge about witchcraft was powerful and could not be shared with a neutral, dis­
interested fieldworker because such knowledge implicated the researcher in the 
conflictive world itself (see also Ashforth 2000, Stoller and Olkes 1987). So, 
Favret-Saada had to demonstrate that she had been "caught" as either a 
bewitched victim or as an unwitcher to elicit the discourse of witchcraft victims and 
unwitchers. 
In his article On Ethnographic Authority, published originally in 1983, James 
Clifford (1988:21- 54) analyzes the development of ethnography from experiential 
to interpretive, dialogical, and polyphonic modes of authority. He shows how reflex­
ive fieldwork and ethnography arose from a critique of earlier fieldwork practices 
and forms of textual representation. These older practices did not pay attention to 
the power relation between fieldworker and informant, the intersubjective con­
struction of field notes, and the translation of experience and dialog into authori­
tative texts. Clifford credits Bronislaw Malinowski (see Chapter 3) with establishing 
this mode of fieldwork authority founded on the ethnograph er's year-long experi­
ence in the culture under study. Anthropo logists became trained scientists who 
resided among their research participants, learned their language, participated in 
and observed their everyday and not so everyday lives, wrote ethnographies based 
on objective data, and were informed by theoretical questions. Participant obser­
vation became the queen of anthropo logical field methods because of its combina­
tion of empathy and detachment which allowed an ethnographer to alternate the 
native's point of view with an objective stance. However , behind this seemingly 
controlled insider-outsider dialectic, there was a continuous negotiation between 

446 PART IX: REFLEXIVE ETHNOGRAPHY 
fieldworker and informants about cultural representation which was shielded by the 
ethnographer 's rhetorical authority. 
These objectified ethnographies, argues Clifford, came under increasing attack in 
the 1960s because they ignored the voices of the informants and the subjective expe­
riences of the fieldworkers. Influenced by a range of theories, notably hermeneut ics, 
critical theory, feminist theory, ethnomethodo logy, and symbolic interactionism (see 
Alvesson and Skoldberg 2000), anthropologists began to emphasi ze the importan ce 
of meaning, interpretation, and intersubjectivi ty. An analogy was drawn between 
cultures and texts because grasping the multiple meanings of actions and practices, 
just as understanding the many meanings of words and sentences, required inter­
pretation. The most direct influence of this approach on ethnographic fieldwork and 
writing was a commitment to so-called thick description. Thick description involved 
an interpretation of the intertWined cultural constructions and social discourses of 
actors. This exegesis promised to result in a richly textured, multi-la yered and multi­
voiced ethnography (Geertz 1973}. Such interpretation became achieved method­
ologically by way of a hermeneutic circle in which understanding was advanced in 
circular, rather than linear, ways between part and whole, and back again. Clifford 
Geertz (1973) and David Schneider (1968) were at the forefront of this movement, 
which became known as interpretive anthropo logy, while the French philosopher 
Paul Ricoeur had an important theoretical impact (Ricoeur 1974, see also Rabinow 
and Sullivan 1979). The emphasis on textuality and meaning soon provoked a cri­
tique from withjn interpretive circles. Kevin Dwyer (1987) argued that Geertz and 
his supporters, including Rabinow in his Reflections on Fieldwork in Morocco, 
failed to bridge the gap between Self and Other because the anthropologist remained 
in the superior position as the observer and interpreter of a cultural reality beyond 
the fieldwork encount er. Dwyer advocated a dialogical approach that acknowledged 
the processual construction of field notes and the interdependence of ethnograph er 
and research participant (see also Dumont 1978, Handelman 1993). Dwyer accom­
plished this goal in his own ethnographic work on Morocco by presenting verba­
tim the unfolding dialogs with his key informant. This shift from meaning and 
interpretation to discourse and dialog evolved into a growing interest in power and 
polyphony. Under the principal influence of the Russian literary critic Mikhail 
Bakhtin (1981), there arose the awareness that culture was constructed by multiple 
voices of different power and influence, and that this heteroglossia should be 
expressed in the ethnography . 
Concern for meaning, interpretation, subjectivity, intersubjectivity, thick descrip­
tion, dialogics, and polyphony found its way into standard fieldwork practice and 
social science methodology {Alvesson and Skoldb erg 2000; for a critique, see 
Salzman 2002). This attention might not be as explicit or prominent in most ethno­
graphies today as it was in the 1970s and 1980s, but anthropo logists continue to 
realize that they do not simply observe and describe cultures but that they interpret 
and inscribe them, and that fieldwork implicates the selves of ethnographers and 
local research participants in constitutive ways. 

